  Functional constraints on coiling geometry and aperture inclination in gastropods
Author(s) :Koji Noshita. , Takahiro Asami, and Takao Ubukata Source: Paleobiology, 38(2):322-334. 2012.
Published By: The Paleontological Society
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1666/10060.1
URL: http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1666/10060.1
BioOne (www.bioone.org) is a nonprofit, online aggregation of core research in the biological, ecological, and environmental sciences. BioOne provides a sustainable online platform for over 170 journals and books published by nonprofit societies, associations, museums, institutions, and presses.
Your use of this PDF, the BioOne Web site, and all posted and associated content indicates your acceptance of BioOne’s Terms of Use, available at www.bioone.org/page/ terms_of_use.
Usage of BioOne content is strictly limited to personal, educational, and non-commercial use. Commercial inquiries or rights and permissions requests should be directed to the individual publisher as copyright holder.
       BioOne sees sustainable scholarly publishing as an inherently collaborative enterprise connecting authors, nonprofit publishers, academic institutions, research libraries, and research funders in the common goal of maximizing access to critical research.

Paleobiology, 38(2), 2012, pp. 322–334
Functional constraints on coiling geometry and aperture inclination in gastropods
Koji Noshita, Takahiro Asami, and Takao Ubukata
Abstract.—We studied the morphological diversity of gastropod shell forms from the viewpoint of theoretical morphology, emphasizing the relationships of shell form to postural stability and the available space for soft body, which we assessed in terms of the moment of force and soft-tissue ratio calculations, respectively. The results of computer simulations suggest a functional trade-off between postural stability and available space for soft body: a compact shell possessing a low spire and small umbilicus exhibits high postural stability, whereas a less overlapped shell form with a high spire and large umbilicus makes available space for soft body. A functional morphospace analysis using theoretical models reveals that outward and downward inclination of the aperture moderates the functional trade-off between these parameter values and permits compatibility between stable posture and efficient shell construction. The hypothetical optimum that realizes this compatibility is consistent with the observed range of forms estimated from 359 extant gastropod species. The biometric results also suggest that land snails are more highly constrained than marine species in achieving a balance between postural stability and available space for soft body.
Koji Noshita. Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University, Hakozaki 6-10-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan. E-mail: noshita@bio-math10.biology.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Takahiro Asami. Department of Biology, Shinshu University, Asahi 3-1-1 Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan. E-mail: asami99@shinshu-u.ac.jp
Takao Ubukata. Institute of Geosciences, Shizuoka University, Oya 836, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan. E-mail: sbtubuk@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Accepted: 30 August 2011
Supplementary materials deposited at Dryad: doi:10.5061/dryad.6mk023c0
Introduction
Biological taxa show an uneven distribution in the realm of geometrically possible forms, and studies in theoretical morphology have explicitly illustrated such heterogeneity (Raup 1966). The biased distribution is commonly explained by either physical or taxon-specific factors, and has been a principal subject of paleobiological investigations of adaptive morphology (Raup 1966; McGhee 1980; Saunders and Swan 1984; Nikolaeva and Barskov 1994; Niklas 1997; Ubukata 2005; Tanaka 2006). In particular, gastropod shell form has proved a popular target for analyses of biased morphological distributions, attracting attention from a variety of functional viewpoints such as defense against predators (Raup 1966; Vermeij 1979; Vermeij and Covich 1978), available space for soft body (Graus 1974; Cameron 1981; Heath 1985; Stone 1999), and postural stability (Gould 1968; Cain 1977; Cain and Cowie 1978; Cameron 1981; Cook and Jaffar 1984; Okajima and Chiba 2009).
Recently, Okajima and Chiba (2009) attributed the bimodal distribution of spire height in terrestrial pulmonate snails (Cain 1977) to variations in postural stability by estimating mechanical moments of force associated with various shell forms. In addition, Heath (1985) and Stone (1999, 2004) found that gastropods do not always construct their shells with optimal efficiency. However, these studies analyzed the morphological traits independently of each other, focusing on either postural stability or construction efficiency, but not both, whereas a particular shell form is likely to reflect a compromise between these two factors.
Here we focus on the effects of shell form on both postural stability and the available space for soft body, assessing the extent to which we can ascribe the biased distribution of gastropod shell forms to these factors by using a theoretical morphological model. The theoretical morphological approach helps delineate adaptive morphologies of gastropod shell forms because we can estimate the
’ 2012 The Paleontological Society. All rights reserved.
0094-8373/12/3802–0009/$1.00

CONSTRAINTS ON GASTROPOD SHELL GEOMETRY 323
 functionality of suites of parameters for both known and unknown forms. In addition, a theoretical morphological model allows us to abstract and isolate each morphological trait (e.g., whorl expansion rate, spire height) and assess its particular effects on organismic function.
Okajima and Chiba (2009) adopted the moment of force about a fulcrum point as an index of postural stability in gastropods, because adhesion to the substrate and locomotion by creeping are likely to be affected by gravitational forces acting to dislodge a snail from its point of contact with the substrate. However, the models they used to mimic shell form were simple geometries (i.e., columnar or cylindrical) that only roughly approximate the physical stability of actual shell forms.
In our study, we utilized a refined version of Raup’s (1966) geometric model to develop a more rigorous assessment of the effects of morphological variation on postural stability, based on non-destructive measurements of the relevant parameters from museum collections. We used the soft-tissue ratio, as defined by Stone (1999) to evaluate the available space for soft body.
Methods
Theoretical Models of Gastropod Shell Forms.— We use Raup’s logarithmic shell coiling model to describe the geometry of coiled shells (Raup 1962, 1966, 1967; Raup and Michelson 1965). Raup’s model represents shell form by the growth trajectory of a generating curve that approximates the shape of the shell aperture. During growth, the generating curve expands and rotates around, and translates along, a coiling axis. Raup’s original model defines shell form in terms of four parameters: the whorl expansion rate (W), the rate of whorl translation (T), the position of the generating curve in relation to the coiling axis (D), and the width/height ratio of the generating curve (S). Figure 1 shows the shell forms corresponding to various values of W, T, and D. These parameters are technically easier to measure than the parameters of other models (Bayer 1978; McGhee 1978; Løvtrup and Løvtrup 1988;
FIGURE 1. Theoretical diversity of coiled shell forms represented by variations in the five model parameters: whorl expansion rate (W), rate of whorl translation (T), position of the generating curve in relation to the coiling axis (D), and the angles formed between the plane of the generating curve and the coiling axis (D) and shell radius (C). The width/height ratio of the generating curve (S) is equal to 1.
Okamoto 1988a; Ackerly 1989; Illert 1989; Stone 1995; Rice 1998; Hammer and Bucher 2005) and have been widely applied to morphological analyses of shell form (Tanabe et al. 1981; Saunders and Swan 1984; Saunders and Work 1996; Korn and Klug 2003).
Raup (1966) and McGhee (1980) introduced additional parameters to Raup’s original model to refine and expand upon the description of coiled shell forms; e.g., the angles between the plane of the generating curve and (a) the shell radius and (b) the coiling axis. These additional parameters permit a more generalized theoretical model that includes shell forms with apertures inclined at various angles relative to the rest of the shell. Savazzi (1987) and Ubukata (2001), for example, used the additional parameters in their analyses of bivalve shell forms. The orientation of the gastropod aperture directly affects functions related to mobility and adhesion to the substrate (Linsley 1977).
In our model, the orientation of the aperture is defined by angles between the generating curve and the coiling axis (D) and the shell radius (C), in planes oriented perpendicular to the radius and coiling axis, respectively (Fig. 2). The aperture is inclined

324 KOJI NOSHITA ET AL.
 FIGURE 2. Determination of model parameters from measurements of specimens viewed from lateral (left) and umbilical (right) perspectives. The following dimensions were estimated as distances between the endpoints of the arrows: radius of each whorl (di), height of the helix (fi), distance between the coiling axis and the inner margin of the callus (c), breadth of the aperture (b), angle between the diameter of the aperture (in a plane normal to the radius) and the coiling axis (D), and angle between the diameter of the aperture (in a plane normal to the coiling axis) and the shell radius (C).
‘‘downward’’ (in the direction of translation) when D . 0, is inclined ‘‘upward’’ when D , 0, is inclined ‘‘outward’’ (in the direction of radial expansion) when C , 0, and is inclined ‘‘inward’’ when C . 0. A tangential aperture, in which the plane of the aperture is tangential (rather than perpendicular) to preceding whorls, is represented by outward inclination. For simplicity, the generating curve in the present model is represented by a circle (S 5 1). Thus, we used a total of five parameters, (W, T, D, D, and C) to describe the diversity of coiled shell forms (Fig. 1).
Empirical Measurements of Shell Form.—We determined the distribution of geometries in existing taxa by measuring model parameters on the shells of extant species. The measurements were based on x-y coordinate data obtained from digital photographs (Nikon Coolpix 995 or D5000) of specimens showing lateral and umbilical views. For the lateral views, each shell was positioned so that its coiling axis was horizontal and the plane of the aperture was vertical. The umbilical view was obtained by orienting the shell apex-down while maintaining a vertical coiling axis.
Data were extracted from the digital images using the Visual Basic 6.0 program ‘‘Spiral Shell Measure’’ (Noshita 2010). The following
dimensions represent distances between the endpoints of the arrows illustrated in Figure 2: radii of successive whorls (di, di21, di22 ...), height of the helix (fi), distance between the coiling axis and the inner margin of the callus (c), width of the aperture (b), angle between the diameter of the aperture (in a plane normal to the radius) and the coiling axis (D), and angle between the diameter of the aperture (in a plane normal to the coiling axis) and the shell radius (C).
In most gastropod species, the values of the whorl expansion and translation rates (W and T, respectively) vary during growth (i.e., the shells do not strictly conform to the logarithmic model); therefore, average values of W
and T were estimated by "#
and
i~1 i~1
02 3
W~exp 2 n ilndi{ i~1
i
lndi
Xn XnXn
=
2Xn (Xn)231 4n i2{ i 5A
Xn 1(Xn)2= T~@4 fi{n fi 5
i~1
i
 i~1
4Xn 1Xn 5A
2
)2311=2 di{n di ,
(
i~1
 i~1 i~1
respectively (Appendix I). The value of D is
given by
D~c=ðbzcÞ:
Note that c is negative when the inner margin of the aperture overlaps the coiling axis (region of the callus), whereas c is positive when there is a gap (umbilicus) between the aperture and the coiling axis. The values of W, D, and T were calculated using the computer program ‘‘Raup’s Parameter Calculator’’ written in Wolfram Research Mathematica 7.0. The concept and the source code of this program were published by Noshita (2010). We took repeated measurements of Raup’s parameters to evaluate their measurement errors (Appendix II).
Moment of Force Estimations.—Following Okajima and Chiba (2009), we used the

moment of gravitational force acting at the shell’s center of gravity and passing through a fulcrum point located near the center of contact between the snail and substrate as an index of postural stability. We calculated the moment of force for a range of theoretical geometries. The special case of the moment of force on a horizontal substrate (see Okajima and Chiba 2009) was generalized to a range of topographies. Shelled gastropods inhabit a wide range of topographies in all habitats (land, freshwater, and marine). The posture of the snail can be represented by a combination of pitching (m) and rolling (n) angles, and we can define a variety of snail orientations and surface inclinations with varying m and n values. We define L as the average magnitude of the moment of force for a given topography (assuming that any orientation of the snail on the surface is equally probable). We estimated the average moment of force on a substrate (L) as
intersects the dorso-ventral axis at a right angle and passes through the fulcrum point as defined below. In this study, we considered two postures of a snail relative to the substrate: (1) the snail adheres to the substrate with the normal vector of its aperture passing through the aperture centroid (aperture is parallel to the substrate), and (2) the tangent vector of the growth trajectory of the aperture centroid is perpendicular to the substrate (the aperture may be inclined at an angle to the substrate). The fulcrum point is defined as the point of intersection of either the normal or the tangent vector with the substrate.
Raup and Chamberlain (1967) presented a method to calculate the center of gravity of cephalopod shells, but it is applicable only to planispiral shells. Okamoto (1988b) calculated the center of gravity of three-dimensionally coiled heteromorph ammonoids, but his method is not applicable to shells with a ‘‘hollow section.’’ Our procedure for determining the center of gravity involves calculating the volume of the neighborhood around a space curve (see Appendix IV). We calculated the volume and center of gravity for each small, subdivided segment of the generating curve traveling along a helicospiral trajectory, using a differential geometry similar to the method of Okamoto (1988b). The center of gravity of the entire shell was determined by integrating the volumes and centers of gravity of the individual segments.
The moment-of-force estimations require calculations of the volume of successive segments of the generating curve. Raup and Graus (1972) provided general equations for calculating the volume of helicospiral shells. Stone (1997) introduced a whorl-by-whorl method for determining the volume of shells with whorl overlap, which is applicable to shells exhibiting allometric growth; however, we did not adopt Stone’s method, which is somewhat laborious. We did not consider the density differences between shell and softtissue, and we assumed the shell and softtissue material to have a uniform density. Values of L were standardized to the total shell volume, and the inverse value of the standardized L value was used as the index of postural stability.
L~
ð ð
kNðm,nÞkdmdn
􏰥ð ð
dmdn,
where m and n are, respectively, the pitch and roll of the snail on an inclined surface. The set (m, n) defines the ‘‘topography’’ of the substrate and N is the moment of force on (m, n). N is defined as the cross product between the positional vector of the center of gravity and the gravitational vector. Okajima and Chiba (2009) assumed the substrate to be horizontal or vertical and excluded any inclined planes from their analyses. To incorporate the effect of a wide range of topographies on postural stability, we calculated L by integrating N over the intervals 2p/2 # m # p/2 and 2p # n # p.
Moment-of-force estimations require calculations of the magnitude of the concave section formed by whorl overlap, which we call the ‘‘hollow section’’ (Appendix III), as well as calculations of the center of gravity of the shell (Appendix IV).
The orientation of the snail with respect to the vertical direction is an important determinant of the moment of force due to gravity. We define the ‘‘dorso-ventral’’ axis as the perpendicular direction of the shell’s center of gravity from the substrate. The ‘‘antero-posterior’’ axis
CONSTRAINTS ON GASTROPOD SHELL GEOMETRY 325

326 KOJI NOSHITA ET AL.
TABLE 1. List of parameter values adopted for simulations. A total of 22,525 theoretical models were generated by combinations of these parameter values.
Parameter Adopted values for simulation
W 100.2 100.4 100.6 100.8 10 T012345678
   D
D C
20.6 20.4 24p/9 2p/3 24p/9 2p/3
20.2 22p/9 22p/9
0 2p/9 2p/9
0.2 0
0
0.4 0.6
p/9 2p/9 p/3 4p/9 p/9 2p/9 p/3 4p/9
 Estimation of the Soft-Tissue Ratio.—The available space for soft body was represented by the soft-tissue ratio, which is the volume of internal shell space relative to the volume of shell required to enclose the space. The ratio was estimated for theoretical models as
E~Vsoft=V,
where Vsoft is the internal volume of the shell and V is the total volume of shell material. The values of E were obtained simultaneously with the calculations of moment of force using the program ‘‘Spiral Shell Properties’’ written in Wolfram Research Mathematica 7.0 (Noshita 2010). In our model, relative shell thickness in relation to whorl radius was assumed to be constant and independent of the size or shape of the shell. Stone (1999) used a similar measure, equal to the value of (12E)/E (ratio of the volume of shell material to the volume of enclosed space), in studies of shell form.
Computer Simulations.—To obtain a functional morphospace that mimics an ‘‘adaptive landscape,’’ we calculated the functional parameters L and E for a total of 22,525 theoretical shell forms generated by various combinations of the five model parameters W, T, D, D, and C (Table 1).
Biometric Analyses.—To estimate L and E in actual shells, we measured W, T, D, D, and C in 390 specimens belonging to 359 species of orthogastropods (Supplementary Table 1). The species were classified into three categories based on their habitats: land (L; n 5 104), freshwater (F; n 5 28), and marine (M; n 5 258) species. The distributions of model and functional parameters were compared among habitats. The specimens were selected from collections at Shizuoka University (SUM), Shinshu University (SHIN), Bishop Museum
(BPBM), Network for Shizuoka Prefecture Museum of Natural History (SPMN), and the University Museum, University of Tokyo (UMUT).
Results
Computer Simulations.—When the values of C and D are set to zero, postural stability (1/L) tends to increase as T or D decreases; in other words, more compact shells are more stable (Fig. 3). On the other hand, the available space for soft body tends to increase as T or D increases; i.e., the available space for soft body is greater in shells with less overlapping whorls (Fig. 3). E is the largest when T and D are moderate values (e.g., contour diagram of the available space for soft body in Fig. 3); this means that the available space for soft body is greatest when adjacent whorls slightly overlap each other. However, E tends to increase as T or D increases. These results imply a functional trade-off between postural stability and the available space for soft body in shells without apertural inclination, expressed in terms of spire height and umbilical width. The relationship between growth parameters and functional properties depends, however, on the orientation of the aperture. When W is large, the functional trade-offs and limits to optimality are generally not influenced by variations in the values of C and D (Supplementary Figs. 1, 2). When W is small, however, there is an optimum that realizes both stable posture and efficient shell construction when C is negative (the aperture points outward) and D is positive (the aperture faces downward), corresponding to valuesofaboutD50andT52(Figs.4,5; Supplementary Figs. 1, 2). In this case, postural stability is highest when C 5 22p/9 and D 5 2p/9, whereas shell construction is most

efficient when C 5 p/9 and D 5 p/9. When T and D are sufficiently large, available space for soft body is generally large regardless of the values of C and D, although a shallow
‘‘valley’’ of low space availability for soft body corresponds to negative values of D when T is large (e.g., contour diagram of the available space for soft body in Fig. 5).
CONSTRAINTS ON GASTROPOD SHELL GEOMETRY 327
 FIGURE 3. Contour diagrams depicting the postural stability (1/L) and the available space for soft-body (E) values on the T-D morphospace for W 5 100.2, D 5 0, and C 5 0. The positions of actual specimens with parameters close to the values depicted on the diagrams are plotted by symbols representing their respective habitats (land, freshwater, and marine). The criterion for including a specimen on the diagram is that the measured parameters (W, T, and D) fall within a certain range of the plotted values (10vs , Ds, and Cs), such that W 5 10vs+0:1, D 5 Ds 6 p/9, and C 5 Cs 6 p/9.
 FIGURE 4. Contour diagrams of 1/L and E on the T-D morphospace for W 5 100.2, D 5 p/3, and C 5 0 (see Fig. 3 for details.). Peak of the postural stability values shifts to less overlap region with aperture inclination.

328 KOJI NOSHITA ET AL.
 FIGURE 5. Contour diagrams of 1/L and E on the C-D morphospace for W 5 100.2, T 5 4, and D 5 0. The criterion for including a specimen on the diagram is that the measured parameters (W, T, and D) fall within a certain range of the plotted values (10vs , Ts, and Ds), such that W 5 10vs+0:1, T 5 Ts 6 0.5, and D 5 Ds 6 0.1.
Biometric Analyses.—The most densely populated region of actual shell forms is located ataboutD50andT52inthemorphospace, whereas regions represented by small values of T and D, and large values of T and D, are almost empty (Figs. 3, 4). Most snails are characterized by negative C and positive D values. The mean and standard deviation of C are 20.317 and 0.318, respectively, and the mean and standard deviation of D are 0.383 and 0.328, respectively.
The biometric analyses show that actual shell forms tend to occupy optimal regions of the morphospace, which allows the animals to achieve both stable postures and sufficient space for soft body. Postural stability (1/L) values for all individuals are greater than 0.094 (median value, 0.167) and soft tissue ratios (E) are greater than 0.558 (median value, 0.807).
The results of inter-habitat comparisons show that land snails are characterized by both higher stability and higher efficiency indices than are marine species (Fig. 6). Differences in the median values of 1/L and E were confirmed by pairwise Mann-Whitney U-tests with the Bonferroni-Holm correction (p , 0.05) (Tables 2, 3). These results suggest
that land snails are more strictly constrained than marine species in terms of both postural stability and available space for soft body (Fig. 6).
Discussion
Differences in the values of functional parameters observed in gastropods from different habitats may be attributed to variations in the physical and chemical characteristics of these habitats. Because of buoyancy, aquatic snails are less subject to the effects of gravity than are land snails. On the other hand, land and freshwater environments are deficient in the calcium carbonate required for shell construction, compared with marine environments. Indeed, land and freshwater species generally possess thinner shells and lack heavy sculpture (Graus 1974; Goodfriend 1986).
Our calculations revealed that a functional trade-off between postural stability and the available space for soft body is inevitable when the whorl expansion rate is high or when the aperture is not inclined. Snails can, however, realize both stable posture and efficient shell construction if they adopt a form with a low expansion rate and an

CONSTRAINTS ON GASTROPOD SHELL GEOMETRY 329
 FIGURE 6. Histograms of 1/L and E values in land (A, D), freshwater (B, E), and marine species (C, F).
inclined aperture (Fig. 5). These results may explain some known biases in the distribution of gastropod shell forms. Okajima and Chiba (2009) attributed the bimodal distribution of
TABLE 2. Statistics for the functional parameters estimated for each habitat: Min 5 minimum; Q1 5 lower quartile; Q3 5 upper quartile; Max 5 maximum.
Land Freshwater Marine 1/L E 1/L E 1/L E
Min 0.0943 0.6951 0.1052 0.7013 0.0959 0.5580 Q1 0.1546 0.7988 0.1469 0.8048 0.1464 0.7892 Median 0.1713 0.8078 0.1715 0.8088 0.1623 0.8066 Q3 0.1910 0.8118 0.1922 0.8094 0.1842 0.8093 Max 0.2579 0.8223 0.2655 0.8152 0.3324 0.8244
an index representing spire height in terrestrial pulmonates to the mechanics of balancing the shell on vertical substrates; they showed that shells with moderate spire
TABLE 3. Results of Mann-Whitney U-tests with the Bonferroni-Holm correction showing p-values for the comparisons of postural stability and efficiency of construction between species from different habitats (M 5 marine; F 5 freshwater; L 5 land). The differences between land and marine species were significant at the 5% level of probability.
L-F L-M F-M
1/L 0.687 0.015 0.491 E 0.861 0.005 0.082
             
330 KOJI NOSHITA ET AL.
  FIGURE 7. Scatter plot showing the distribution of aperture inclination angles (D and C) in specimens from different habitats. The mean (x) and standard deviation (SD) for C are x 5 20.317 and SD 5 0.318, and for D are x 5 0.383 and SD 5 0.328.
indices tend to be ill-balanced; they did not, however, explain why neither very highnor very low-spire indices are common in land snails, despite the fact that these indices enhance postural stability (according to their calculations). Our results suggest that highspired shells tend to be less stable than lowspired shells, given the range of substrate topographies encountered in natural environments. Low-spired forms, on the other hand, show lower space availability for soft body and are therefore likely to be disadvantageous in habitats where calcium carbonate is a limiting resource. Our results suggest that such limitations also restrict morphological diversity in aquatic snail species to some extent (Figs. 3, 4).
Heath (1985) and Stone (1999, 2004) assessed whether gastropod shells are efficiently constructed, and concluded that most actual shell forms do not attain the theoretically optimal values. Stone (2004) attributed such nonoptimal shell forms to the nonlinear relationship between functional properties and whorl overlap: volume of shell material decreases rapidly when whorl overlap is small, and living space substantially decreases when whorl overlap is large. He concluded that keeping adequate living space might have
FIGURE 8. Theoretical models of gastropod shell forms with the values W 5 100.2, T 5 2, and D 5 0, but with differing aperture orientations.
predominated over saving shell material as a constraint factor in marine species because calcium carbonate is abundant in the marine environment. This result might also be explained by the functional trade-offs for postural stability we suggest here. When the whorl expansion rate is not high, an optimum balance between postural stability and space availability for soft body is achieved at about D 5 0 and T 5 2; these values are representative of the geometries of many of the specimens collected by Stone (1999).
Linsley proposed the ‘‘Law of Tangential Apertures,’’ which describes gastropods with ‘‘an aperture whose plane is tangent to the body whorl of the univalve so that the aperture and ventral most part of the body whorl lie together in one plane’’ (1977: p. 197). He found that these gastropods live with their apertural plane parallel to the substrate, and proposed that this orientation facilitates clamping tightly to the substrate (especially hard substrates), thereby surviving predation. According to our results, most snail apertures exhibit negative C and positive D values (Fig. 7), thus forming a tangential aperture (Fig. 8). The tangential aperture meets the requirements of three functional demands: postural stability, available space for soft body, and protection against predators. Vermeij (1971) and Schindel (1990) pointed out that the apertures of high-spired shells are generally not highly inclined and suggested that the presence of a siphon may impose morphogenetic constraints that govern the orientation of the aperture. Many other studies discussed the relation of aperture inclinations to shell forms, modes of locomotion, and physical environment (Linsley 1978a,b; McNair 1981). These ecological insights are subjects for future study.
   
When T and D are small, 1/L and E increase with increasing W. However, only a few snails in our study possess values of W greater than 100.6 (although our sample did not include patellogastropod limpets, which generally have high rates of expansion). This paradox may warrant further exploration. The general absence of high W values in gastropods could be attributed to severe functional trade-offs between postural stability and available space for soft body. However, there is a region of the morphospace where relatively large values of 1/L and E correspond to large W values (Fig. 5). Another possible explanation for the paucity of shells with high expansion rates may be related to the metabolic costs of secreting pedal mucus. Pedal mucus assists in crawling and adhesion to substrates (Denny 1980; Ewoldt et al. 2006), and snails with high expansion rates require large volumes of pedal mucus, but it is metabolically costly to produce (Kideys and Hartnoll 1991; Lauga and Hosoi 2006). It is also important to consider the mathematical properties of the parameter W; the distribution of W is generally right-skewed because W increases exponentially as the shell coiling becomes looser outward from the coiling axis. These considerations require further analysis using more refined theoretical models.
This study focused on the functional aspects of shell form. However, the distribution of molluscan shells within a theoretical morphospace can also be biased by geometrical covariances or constructional linkages among parameters or dimensions, e.g., algebraic interdependence of parameters (Schindel 1990; Stone 1996), geometric balance between perimeters and areas of the whorl section (Ubukata et al. 2008), or the effect on the shell form of pattern of relative rate of shell accretion for each point around aperture (Rice 1998; Ubukata 2003; Hammer and Bucher 2005). Coupling these considerations with functional morphospace analyses, as shown above, is a subject for future research.
Acknowledgments
We thank T. Sasaki and K. Yokoyama for their assistance in accessing specimens. T.
Sasaki provided valuable comments. The study was supported in part by the ‘‘Mushashugyo’’ Project of Encouragement for Students of Science and Mathematics in Shizuoka University.
Literature Cited
CONSTRAINTS ON GASTROPOD SHELL GEOMETRY 331

332 KOJI NOSHITA ET AL.
Appendix I
Evaluation of the Average Raup’s W and T
The average Raup’s W and T through ontogeny can be evaluated by regressions if we adopt an isometric shell growth. In this case, the length between the coiling axis and the edge of the ith whorl is expressed by
ln d􏰈i ~ ln d0zi ln W1=2:
The measurement value of di* is expressed by di, then error sum of
squares (Ew) is given by
Ew~ Xn 􏰚ln di{ ln d0{i ln W1=2􏰛2:
i~1
We can rewrite this equation with lnd0 5 a and lnW1/2 5 v,
qEw =qv~{2 Then, we get
i~1
i ln di z2a
i~1
i~1 iz2v
Xn 2 ðlndi{a{ivÞ :
Ew~
We can estimate W (and d0), which minimizes EW, by solving the
following equations:
qEw =qa~{2
i~1
Xn
Xn
ln di z2anz2v
Xn Xn Xn
# 2 Xn
i~1 i~1 i~1 i~1 i~1
axis and the edge of the ith whorl (d*i) are expressed by f􏰈~f0zTd􏰈,
d􏰈 ~(f 􏰈 {f0 )=T: ii
Then error sum products (ET) is given by
Xn i~0
0 " Xn
The height of the helix (f*i) and the length between the coiling
( Xn ) 2 3 1 W~exp@2 n ilndi{ i lndi =4n i2{ i 5A:
ET ~
(fi {f0 {Tdi )f(fi {f0 )=T{di g:
Xn Xn
ii
i~1
i~0,
i2 ~0:
i~1

We can also estimate T (and f0), which minimizes ET by solving the following equations:
In our study, we calculated shell volume for theoretical models representing isometric growth by using the following algorithm: (1) Assume the last 5p/2 part of the trajectory of successive generating curves excludes the last p/4 of the preceding whorl. Each generating curve is composed of 1200 segments and the position of each segment is represented by its centroid. (2) Consider the distance from the centroid of a segment on the newly formed generating curve to the centroid of the corresponding segment on the preceding whorl, and compare this value with the radius of the preceding generating curve. (3) If the former is less than the latter (i.e., the distance between successive centroids is less than the radius of the preceding whorl), the segment is regarded as a part of the hollow section and its corresponding volume is subtracted from the calculation of total shell volume. It should be noted that when the values of all parameters remain constant throughout growth (isometric or logarithmic growth), all segments of the generating curve show the same relation to the hollow section at successive growth stages.
Appendix IV
Estimating the Center of Gravity by a Curve-Neighbor Method
Imagine a space curve C and a small neighborhood disk surrounding, and oriented at right angles to, C. Consider the volume traced out by Ð along C. The size of Ð, denoted by s, depends on its position along C; the radius of Ð is represented by r(s). If we define X(s) as the position vector at size s, a set of vectors that constitutes an orthonormal moving Frenet frame for a right-handed system is given by
j ðsÞ~X’ðsÞ=jX’ðsÞj, j ðsÞ~j ’ðsÞ􏰘􏰖􏰖j ’ðsÞ􏰖􏰖, j ðsÞ~j ðsÞ|j ðsÞ 1 211312
and
j ’ðsÞ~kðsÞj ðsÞ 12
where j1, j2, and j3 are tangent, normal, and binormal unit vectors, respectively, and k(s) is the curvature of C at s. The position vector of a point on Ð at s, Xe(s), is expressed by the normal and binormal unit vectors:
where t1 and t2 are constants. Therefore, the tangent, normal, and binomial components of C can be transformed into another coordinate system by
qET =qf0 ~({2=T) qET=qT~({1=T2)
Then, we get
02
i~1 i~1 i~1 i~1
Appendix II
(
1 Xn
)23 2
5 4 Xn
di ~0, d2i ~0:
)2311=2 5 A
@ 4 Xn
T~ fi{n fi = di{n di
:
Xn i~1
Xn i~1
ðfi {f0 Þz2 ðfi{f0Þ2z
Xn i~1
Xn i~1
CONSTRAINTS ON GASTROPOD SHELL GEOMETRY 333
(
1 Xn
  Estimation of Measurement Error for Each of Raup’s Parameters
We estimated Raup’s parameters from the data obtained by digitizing 2-D pictures. Because Raup’s model is the most widely used theoretical morphological model (e.g., Vermeij 1971; Kohn and Riggs 1975; Tanabe et al. 1981; Saunders and Swan 1984; Saunders and Work 1996; Korn and Klug 2003), and therefore has been fully investigated, some difficulties in using his model have often been pointed out (e.g., Schindel 1990). One of the difficulties is accurate determination of the position and orientation of the coiling axis. Although some studies proposed rigorous methods for obtaining model parameters from radiographs or 3-D images (Stone 1995, 1997; Monnet et al. 2009), these methods are not practical when many specimens are used.
In addition, an X-ray image would provide accurate measurements only if we could align the specimen such that the coiling axis is perfectly horizontal. We therefore used the plural 2-D photo images taken from several directions to estimate Raup’s parameters, and evaluated the measurement error of each of Raup’s parameters by taking 30 repeated measurements of each identical individual for five specimens housed at the Kyushu University Museum: Nerita chamaeleon (interim number 700), Terebra areolata (interim number 2141), Achatina fulica (interim number L-288), Acavus haemastoma (interim number L-523), and Aegista vermis (interim number L-93) (Supplementary Fig. 3). The method of parameter estimation is same as that shown in the main text (for details see ‘‘Empirical Measurements of Shell Form’’ in the ‘‘Methods’’ section in the text).
e
Supplementary Table 2 shows the results of repeated estima-
tions of parameters for each specimen, and descriptive statistics
for each parameter of each specimen are shown in Supplementary
Table 3. The standard deviations of each parameter were
generally small except in C (Supplementary Fig. 4). C is sensitive
to determination of the coiling axis in some cases and the
standard deviation of C is larger than for any other parameter and ~ especially large in T. areolata. Because T. areolata has a high-spired
shell without an umbilicus, measurements depend highly on accuracy in placing a specimen on a platform such that the coiling axis is kept vertical. In contrast, our repeated measurements show that standard deviations of D are much smaller than those of C.
Appendix III
‘‘Hollow Section’’ Estimations
In most gastropods, a newly formed whorl overlaps and partially
covers the preceding whorl. In a theoretical morphological model,
such an overlapping shell form can be geometrically described but
is physically impossible. In actual shells, the dorsal section of the (Okamoto 1988b): shell aperture curves inward such that the overlapping section is
cut from the ideal helicospiral tube. This concave portion, here p~r called the ‘‘hollow section,’’ causes overestimations of shell volume
if the volume is calculated as an integration of the area of a circular ~r generating curve.
0
ða 0
X ðsÞ~X ðsÞzt1 j2 ðsÞzt2 j3 ðsÞ,
fX1 ,X2 ,X3 g?fs,t1 ,t2 g:
Consequently, the volume traced out by Ð is calculated as
V(r)~
~
ð ða ð
K
dX1 dX2 dX3 Jdt1 dt2 ds
pr(s)2 ds,
where K represents the space of the trajectory of Ð, a is the length of C, and J is the Jacobian. If J # 0 , the coordinate transformation cannot be uniquely defined, meaning that the following conditions are necessary for the transformation:
J~1{t1kðsÞw0, Max1⁄2t1􏰊~rðsÞ, rðsÞv1=kðsÞ:
 Consequently, p, the center of gravity of k, is estimated as follows
ða ða pr(s)2 X (s)ds=
ð0 ð0 aa
pr(s)2 ds
0
r(s)2 X (s)ds= r(s)2 ds, 0

334 KOJI NOSHITA ET AL.
where r represents the density (for simplicity, a density of 1.0 kg/ m3 was assumed for both shell and soft-tissue materials.)
In our analysis, the shell is regarded as a set of multiple spirals, each of which is traced out by its neighborhood segment (Sgi,j). However, in the simulations, the generating curve is tilted at various inclinations, and the spirals are not necessarily normal to their corresponding segments Sgi,j. For determining the center of gravity, Sgi,j was projected onto the plane perpendicular to the tangent vector and the projection was transformed into a circle with the same area and centroid as the projection required to obtain Ð. Each Sgi,j is enclosed by the radii of two circles and two
arcs between the two circles, each with different radii. The centroid of each Sgi,j is given by
v~ð2 sin h=3hÞ􏰀􏰀R1 2 zR1 R2 zR2 2 􏰋􏰘ðR1 zR2 Þ􏰋,
where h is the angle between the radii of Sgi,j, and R1 and R2 are radii of the large and small arcs, respectively. The volume and center of gravity were then computed for every trajectory corresponding to each K. Finally, the summed volume (and mass) of each trajectory was calculated and the center of gravity of the entire shell was obtained by integrating the center of gravity of each trajectory weighted by its respective mass.
