   Molecular Ecology (2010) 19, 2858–2869 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04710.x
Colonization history and genetic diversity: adaptive potential in early stage invasions
J. EALES, R. S. THORPE and A. MALHOTRA
Environment Centre Wales, School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Gwynedd, LL57 2UW, UK
Abstract
The introduction of Anolis cristatellus from the multiple species anole community of Puerto Rico in the Greater Antilles to the island of Dominica in the Lesser Antilles, with its solitary endemic anole, provides an example of a very recent, timed, single colonization. We investigate the geographic origin and adaptive potential of the Dominican population using a range of methods including mtDNA phylogeography, nuclear microsatellite variation and multiple paternity studies, as well as heritability estimates, common garden experiments and comparative geographic studies of quantitative scalation traits. Phylogeographic analysis of NADH2 and microsatellite studies suggests that the Dominican population arose from a set of individuals from the central west area of Puerto Rico within their endemic range. The multiple-individual inoculation, together with sperm storage and evidence of multiple paternity indicate genetic variability and suggest the potential for adaptation by natural selection. Estimates of heritability, common garden experiments and broad sense QST ⁄ FST ratios, linked to replicated comparisons along elevational transects go some way to suggesting that the invasive populations may be adapting by natural selection, in parallel with the endemic anole, in the brief period since their introduction.
Keywords: colonization history, mtDNA phylogeography, natural selection, population genetics, quantitative traits
Received 22 February 2010; revision received 9 April 2010; accepted 20 April 2010
Introduction
The recent application of molecular techniques to invasion biology has greatly enhanced our understanding of the historical processes and evolutionary consequences of invasions (Lee 2002). Genetic tools have been invaluable for defining the source region down to small geographical scales, useful in cases where native source areas are unknown, frequently when introductions are an unintentional by-product of modern transportation networks. Further genetic characterization of source and introduced populations can indicate the loss of genetic diversity commonly associated with a demographic bottleneck (‘founder effect’) during colonization events (Mayr 1963). Such a loss is expected to limit the success
Correspondence: R. S. Thorpe, Tel.: +(0) 1248 382212; Fax: +(0)1248 371644; E-mail: r.s.thorpe@bangor.ac.uk
of colonizations through a combination of the deleterious effects of inbreeding on population growth and because the ability of populations to adaptively respond to selective pressure critically depends upon the availability of genetic diversity (Fisher 1930; Reznick et al. 1997; Sakai et al. 2001).
The genetic founder effect may be offset by the presence of multiple genotypes within an introduced population, via the opportunity for gene flow, recombination and re-assortment of genotypes which in turn, increases genetic variation. Multiple genotypes in the introduced population are likely to result from several separate introduction events, often seen in cases where the probability of repeated introductions is high, such as in older invasions or those occurring along frequented transportation routes such as those seen in red swamp crayfish Procambarus clarkii (Barbaresi et al. 2003) or Anolis sagrei in Florida (Kolbe et al.
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

2004). However, for early stage colonizations, in which the opportunity for secondary introduction events is low, multiple genotypes may be a consequence of a single introduction event containing several genotypes (e.g. accidental introduction by single freight shipments). The latter mode is of particular concern, because it implies that a single colonization event can convey the genetic and phenotypic variation which may facilitate establishment and proliferation from the outset, accelerating the pace of adaptation and spread of the invasive population. Indeed, recent work indicates that the evolutionary potential of an introduced population is less strongly associated with the number of introduction events than the amount of genetic and phenotypic variation (Lavergne & Molofsky 2007).
Genetic diversity and admixture have been documented in a growing number of studies, although are less often described for single introduction events, since it is often difficult to discount multiple introductions due to incomplete knowledge of colonization histories. Single introduction events have resulted in strong founder effects, e.g. A. cristatellus in Florida (Kolbe et al. 2007), although the same study showed evidence of admixture for this mode of introduction (A.cybotes and A.garmani in Florida). Genetic variation in single introduction events may arise from high genetic diversity across small scales in introduced ranges or the collection of imported individuals from genetically distinct source areas for introduction. Reproductive mechanisms such as sperm storage and multiple paternity may also serve to increase the number of haplotypes introduced and have been proposed as a mechanism for mitigating the potentially deleterious consequences of founder effects in Anolis (Calsbeek et al. 2007).
Adaptive responses, accelerated by the novel environmental conditions and short timescales frequently involved in colonization events, have been documented in morphological and behavioural traits of a variety of introduced species (Reznick & Ghalambor 2001; Lee 2002; Yeh 2004). While genetically-based phenotypic shifts between source and introduced populations could potentially be based on genetic drift arising from founder effects (Templeton 1980; Carson & Templeton 1984; Can ̃o et al. 2008), phenotypic trait divergence within introduced ranges is a more direct demonstration of adaptive potential. Evidence for adaptation is particularly strong when correlated with environmental conditions known to affect those traits or when introduced populations show clines that converge with those present in native populations, e.g. St. John’s Wort Hypericum perforatum (Maron et al. 2004).
However, genetically based adaptive trait divergence may be a result of colonization patterns or differential
dispersal by pre-adapted genotypes rather than natural selection e.g. Brassicaceae spp. (Hurka et al. 2003), brown alga Undaria pinnatifida (Voisin et al. 2005). Hence, empirical examples of adaptive responses to within-introduced range environmental heterogeneity have been rare (however see Johnston & Selander 1971; Carroll & Boyd 1992; Maron et al. 2004; Phillips et al. 2006). A fuller understanding of how aspects of earlystage colonization history may affect the genetic capacity for adaptive responses is clearly required. Such investigations require both thorough genetic characterization of native and introduced ranges and a comprehensive knowledge of introduction history. However, many empirical studies are unable to resolve the influence of colonization patterns on the introduction of genetic diversity because introduction histories for the majority of species are poorly understood.
The recent introduction (between 1998 and 2000) and subsequent establishment of Anolis cristatellus on Dominica, Lesser Antilles, is distinct from other Anolis introductions (e.g. Kolbe et al. 2004), as observation from a very early stage (from 2000 onwards) suggests that there have been no subsequent introduction events on Dominica. Since introduction at the port of Deepwater Harbour in the southwest of the island, A. cristatellus has extended its elevational range from sea level to approximately 180 m above sea level (Fig. 1). Anolis are known to be highly phenotypically variable across environmental clines within islands (Malhotra & Thorpe 1991a, 1997a,b, 2000; Thorpe & Malhotra 1996; Thorpe 2002; Thorpe & Stenson 2003). For example, the number, size and shape of lizard scales have been shown to vary with conditions that vary with elevation, including temperature and rainfall (Lister 1976; Thorpe & Baez 1987; Malhotra & Thorpe 1997b; Calsbeek et al. 2006), and are implicated in the maintenance of water balance in reptiles (Horton 1972; Soule ́ & Kerfoot 1972; Daltry et al. 1998; Alibardi 2003).
Quantitative traits of Anolis may vary along altitudinal gradients and correlative studies, molecular studies, parallels and field-based natural selection experiments (Malhotra & Thorpe 1991b, 1997b; Ogden & Thorpe 2002; Thorpe et al. 2004, 2005; 2010) all indicate that this is in response to current ecological conditions rather than past processes such as genetic drift. Moreover, recent studies suggest that these traits are under genetic control and therefore can respond by natural selection (rather than just phenotypic plasticity). For example, heritability of scale number in Anolis sagrei has been demonstrated in a recent natural selection study (Calsbeek et al. 2006) and common-garden experiments in the native Dominican anole, Anolis oculatus, demonstrate that scalation traits are under significant genetic control (Thorpe et al. 2005). Thus, scale number is a trait that is
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
COLONIZATION AND ADAPTIVE POTENTIAL 2859

 2860 J. EALES, R. S. THORPE and A. MALHOTRA
likely to respond to ecologically-based natural selection pressures along elevational gradients. Due to various conflicting environmental influences that vary with elevation, the direction of scale-elevation correlation is difficult to predict in reptiles in general. However, in the native species across the elevational gradient in the same geographic area, scale number increases with elevation and this is the predicted direction for the introduced species.
The aims of this study are first, to establish the geographical origin of Dominican A. cristatellus and investigate the source of the haplotypic diversity in the introduced population. We do this by combining mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplotypes and phylogenetic information from native range and introduced populations with previously published microsatellite data (Eales et al. 2008) and effective founder population size estimates. Second, we combine this information with an assessment into the prevalence of multiple paternity in A. cristatellus females and discuss the genetic capacity for adaptive responses to selective pressure in the new range. Third, we use common-garden experiments and estimates of heritability to establish a genetic compo-
Fig. 1 Map of Puerto Rico and Dominica showing sample location with Dominica inset showing area of expanded detail. Sampling sites for the phylogenetic study in Dominica are DO1–10, while sites also sampled for the common garden experiment are labelled in bold type (low elevation sites are DO1–4; high elevation sites are DO5–8). Site positions and elevations are given in Table S1 (Supporting information). Horizontal hatching indicates the geographical range of A. cristatellus in Dominica as recorded in June 2007. Puerto Rico map shows sampling localities for unique NADH2 haplotypes identified in Fig. 2. The boxed area indicates the extent of the geographical area sampled for this study (79 localities, two individuals sampled from each locality). Labels H-PR01 to H-PR22 indicate sampling areas for the Puerto Rico haplotypes close to Dominican clades in the Bayesian phylogram. Circles denote localities sampled by J. Eales, squares denote localities sampled by R. Glor (unpublished data). Shading ⁄ colouring of symbols indicates clade as defined by the phylogram in Fig. 2 (black: Central West clade; white: Central East clade; diagonal hatched: West clade). Numbers adjacent to symbols denote the number of haplotypes represented per locality.
nent to phenotypic divergence in scale number at the elevational boundaries of the introduced range of A. cristatellus on Dominica. We test for geographical assortment of altitudinally pre-adapted genotypes from the source region. Our findings are summarized to discuss how colonization history influences genetic variability and adaptive potential during the early stages of colonization.
Materials and methods
Molecular sample collection
Ninety-eight tail tip biopsies were collected from ten sites across the introduced Dominican range (DO1–10, Fig. 1, Table S1, Supporting information) and preserved in 95% ethanol. Information from a mtDNA phylogeny of Puerto Rican A. cristatellus placed a haplotype from the introduced Dominican range within a cluster of haplotypes from central Puerto Rico (R. Glor, unpublished). This is part of the natural endemic range of this species, rather than a population derived from multiple invasions with mixed genotypes (Kolbe et al.
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

2007). Using this information, sampling in Puerto Rico was restricted to 79 localities in central Puerto Rico and two individuals were sampled from each locality (Fig. 1). Locality information was recorded using a handheld Garmin 60CS GPS.
DNA extraction and sequencing
Total genomic DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Tissue Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s protocol for animal tissues. Approximately 945 bp of mtDNA from the NADH2 gene was amplified using the primers H5730 (Glor et al. 2004) and L4437b (Macey et al. 1997). Polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were carried out in 20 lL volumes, containing 20 ng template DNA, 1.5 mM of MgCl2, 2lL of Thermophilic DNA Polymerase 10 · buffer, 0.2 mM each dNTP, 0.5 lM of each primer and 0.5 U Taq Polymerase (New England BioLabs). PCR amplifications were performed in an MJ Research PTC200 thermal cycler (Waltham, MA) using the following temperature cycling profile: a 5 min denaturation step at 94 °C followed by 40 cycles of denaturation for 30 s at 94 °C, annealing for 30 s at 55 °C and extension for 60 s at72°C.Afinalstepat72°Cfor5minfollowedthe40 cycles. PCR product was purified from agarose gel using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen). Unincorportated nucleotides and primers were removed using 10 · SAP (Promega) and Exonuclease I (New England BioLabs), following manufacturer’s protocol (Promega). The forward and reverse primers were used for sequencing together with a specifically designed sequencing primer (L4280 5¢-TTAACACAAGCAGCRGCMTCTGC-3¢), using dye-labelled terminators (ABI PRISMTM BigDyeTM Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit) and subsequently run on an ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer.
Phylogenetic analysis
Mitochondrial sequence data collected for this study was combined with 65 mtDNA haplotypes for Puerto Rico and five Anolis outgroups (A. bimaculatus, A. distichus, A. evermanni, A. krugi and A. stratulus) provided by R. Glor and J. B. Losos (Kolbe et al. 2007), after excluding replicated haplotypes to reduce computational time. Sequences were aligned using Codoncode Aligner v.1.2 (CodonCode Co.) and translated into amino acid sequences to check for the presence of stop codons which might indicate the amplification of pseudogenes. McDonald & Kreitman’s (1991) test was used to evaluate the possibility of non-neutral evolution of the NADH2 gene (Ballard & Kreitman 1995). The genetic data analysis software package MrBayes v.3.1 (Huelsenbeck & Ronquist 2001) was used to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree by Bayesian methods. All sites were
equally weighted. The model of evolution used for Bayesian analysis was estimated by Modeltest v.3.0 (Posada & Crandall 1998) and the parameter values were estimated by MrBayes. Four chains were run, with 2 million generations, sampling the chains every hundred generations. Time to stationarity was estimated by plotting tree log-likelihood score against generation number and determining the number of generations until the values reached an asymptote.
A majority rule consensus tree (‘Bayesian’ tree) was calculated from the posterior distribution of trees and the posterior probabilities calculated as the percentage of samples recovering any particular clade (Huelsenbeck & Ronquist 2001). Three further independent Bayesian analyses were run to check for local optima. Since multiple haplotypes from Puerto Rico were present in Dominica, the hypothesis that pre-adapted genotypes were responsible for any observed elevational phenotypic clines in Dominica needed to be excluded. A chi-square contingency table was used to evaluate whether the distribution of haplotypes was significantly different among low and high elevation localities in both Puerto Rico and Dominica (Sokal & Rohlf 1995). Haplotypes were binned according to the smallest Bayesian defined clades that contained both Dominican and Puerto Rican haplotypes. Chi-square contingency tables require an expected value of five or more per cell thus rare haplotypes were excluded from this analysis.
Founder population size
A minimum estimate of effective founder population size can be obtained both from mtDNA and microsatellite allele frequency data (Eales et al. 2008). Since the Dominica population is very recent and assumed to have undergone negligible mutation, methods to estimate effective population size that incorporate models of evolution are inappropriate and of limited value. Furthermore, although the number of generations may be inferred relatively reliably for Dominican A. cristatellus, an estimate of current population size, which is necessary for many effective population size simulations, may be grossly inaccurate. The number of alleles (n) within the most variable locus in the Dominican population provides a minimum estimate of the effective founder population size (Rasner et al. 2004). Since there is no evidence to suggest that secondary introductions of A. cristatellus in Dominica have taken place (observation since early stages from 2000 onwards) and de novo mutations are likely to have had a trivial impact, n ⁄ 2 is the minimum estimate for the effective founding population size. The true number of founders is likely to be significantly greater than this minimum estimate because it is unlikely that each individual founder was heterozygotic at all loci.
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
COLONIZATION AND ADAPTIVE POTENTIAL 2861

2862 J. EALES, R. S. THORPE and A. MALHOTRA
Furthermore, the allele frequency distribution of source populations is likely to alter the probability of founder populations containing n alleles.
To obtain a more reliable estimate of minimum effective founder population size, a simulation program (written by R. Glor) was used. To test whether the source populations from Puerto Rico could be pooled for this analysis, an analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) was performed using Arlequin v.3.01 (Excoffier et al. 2005). A specified number of individuals (between 1 and 100) were sampled from the allele frequency distribution of source populations. This was repeated 10 000 times and the proportion of times that at least n alleles were contained within the sample was calculated. Although the simulation provides a minimum effective founder population size estimate, the true number of founders is likely to be higher since it is probable that the founder population comprised multiple individuals carrying the identified alleles and some mtDNA haplotypes may have been introduced but subsequently become extinct. A lower bound estimate of founding population size can also be obtained from mtDNA data, since the number of haplotypes present in introduced populations is equal to the minimum number of sexually mature females present in the founding population. This figure is also likely to be an underestimate, since it is possible that multiple females with the same mtDNA haplotypes were present in the founder population.
Multiple paternity analysis
In a diploid sexually reproducing species such as A. cristatellus, codominant hypervariable nuclear markers such as microsatellites can be used to deduce the minimum number of paternal donors when the maternal donor is known. As either of the two alleles could be inherited from the father, we used the presence of three or more paternal alleles in a female’s progeny to infer multiple paternity. We conservatively required this to occur in at least two loci to exclude the possibility of spontaneous mutation. This could only be achieved when the number of offspring in a progeny group was greater than two, only such progeny groups were included in the multiple paternity analysis (Fig. S1, Supporting information). Females originated from five localities across low (two localities) and high (three localities) altitudes in the introduced Dominican range. Families consisted of between three and five offspring, family information is available in Fig. S1 and Table S2 (Supporting information) and husbandry conditions are given below. DNA was extracted from tail tip biopsies of 23 females and their 79 offspring using the Chelex extraction method (Walsh et al. 1991). Five polymorphic
microsatellites developed by Glor et al. (2007) were amplified and analysed using methods described in Eales et al. (2008). Allele sizes were estimated for females and offspring and following exclusion of the maternal allele(s), paternal alleles were inferred from offspring genotypes. If three or more differing alleles were present in the progeny data set in two or more loci, multiple paternity was inferred for that progeny group, according to Mendelian expectations.
Common garden experiment and analysis
Gravid female A. cristatellus were sampled from eight localities, DO1–8 (paired across four elevational transects) to represent the current elevational extremes of the introduced range (Fig. 1). Four low elevation sites ranging between 3 and 38 m (mean 25.25 m) above sea level and four high elevation sites ranging between 128 and 176 m (mean 151 m) above sea level were included in the sampling regime. As these four transects are distributed down the south-western sector of the island, latitudinal variation could also be controlled for. The populations were considered independent because the distance between sites was greater than the maximum range of movement of an individual in the study time period [approximately 40 m2 (Schoener & Schoener 1982, pers. obs.)].
Females (and their eggs) from all localities were housed individually in identical constant conditions compatible with those in the introduced range in Dominica (12 h day length with Osram Lumilux Daylight tubes, c. 27 °C, by day, 24 °C at night, with <60% humidity, water ad libitum and food regularly). Eggs and the resulting offspring were incubated and reared at identical conditions over a period of 4 months. Females and their resulting offspring were measured for two scalation characters: the number of scales between the midline of the ventral surface to the midline of the dorsal surface [circum-trunk scales (CTS)] and the number of ventral scales between the limb axillae [ventral scales (VS)]. Scale counts were undertaken with locality information shielded, repeated twice and an average of the two counts used for subsequent analysis. Where more than one offspring was produced per female, the means of scalation characters were calculated for the siblings. Offspring from a single female may consist of a mixture of full and half sibs. This may increase the spread of the data for a given female, but would not bias the mean. First, we tested for the lack of a significant difference in scalation characters between (maternal) parent and F1 progeny using a three-factor MANOVA across four low ⁄ high elevation transects with elevation, transect and generation as fixed factors and including interaction terms. Second, we tested for
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

significant morphological differences between low and high elevation sites for F1 progeny using a two-factor MANOVA, with elevation and transect as fixed factors.
The pooled within-group parent-offspring regression (Gregory et al. 1977; Berthold & Pulido 1994) and SE were calculated for each of the scalation traits. Populations were separated into groups (a group is a sample from an individual site within a transect) for the regression analysis to maintain the independence of populations, consistent with methods used in the other analyses. Since only the maternal trait value was measured, this single parent-offspring regression estimates half the heritability (h2) (Falconer & Mackay 1996; Lynch & Walsh 1998). Although the limitations of this approach, (which include potentially inflated heritability estimates due to maternal effects) are recognized and sample sizes were limited (Fig. S1), the regression slope is still a useful estimator of heritability for the purpose of this study.
Evidence for adaptation may be obtained by comparing QST and FST, where the former is based on the genetic variance of a quantitative trait (Spitze 1993) and the latter on neutral alleles. When QST values approximate FST values this suggests that the quantitative traits are not under selection, but when QST values are greater than FST it implies that the quantitative trait variation is adaptive, i.e. driven by natural selection. However, there are difficulties with this approach when using wild populations as narrow sense QST estimates based on half-sib design breeding experiments are not available (Leinonen et al. 2007; Pujol et al. 2008). Nevertheless, when common garden experiments are used (Leinonen et al. 2007), as in this study, broad sense QST estimates are available which take into account the environmental contribution, but which may still be influenced by dominance and maternal effects. In this study we conservatively regard broad sense QST estimates of one or more orders of magnitude greater than FST estimates to be a preliminary evidence of selection. Here we compare pairs of low and high elevation populations along the four Dominican transects (sites 1 vs. 5, 2 vs. 6, 3 vs. 7, 4 vs. 8), where FST is computed from five neutral microsatellites (Eales et al. 2008) and broad sense QST is computed from traits recorded from the F1 generation reared in the common garden experiment as QST = ra2 ⁄ (ra2 + 2 rw2) where ra2 = among-group variance and rw2 = within-group variance.
Results
Phylogenetic analyses and founder population size
The aligned data set consisted of a 945 bp fragment of mtDNA from a total of 97 unique haplotypes (excluding
outgroups). No insertions, deletions or stop codons were found in the data and the substitutional model of molecular evolution (GTR + I + Gamma) was chosen as the best model to fit the data by Modeltest v.3.0. Stationarity was reached after initial 25% oftrees were generated in Bayesian inference and these 25% were discarded as the ‘burn-in’. Of the 945 sites, 509 were variable, 353 of which were parsimony-informative. Twenty-five unique Puerto Rican and seven unique Dominican haplotypes were identified from those sequenced specifically for this study (GenBank accession numbers EU599051–75). Seven new mtDNA haplotypes were present in Dominica (GenBank accession numbers EU599076–82) all of which were unique to the introduced range.
The section of the phylogram relevant to this study is presented in Fig. 2. Bayesian analysis grouped Dominican haplotypes into two clades within the Puerto Rico phylogeny, the central west Puerto Rican clade and the central east Puerto Rican clade (Fig. 2) with high support (posterior probabilities 1.00 and 0.98 respectively). Together with sampling locality information (Supporting information 1), the two clades represent a region in the central west of Puerto Rico which is the likely geographical source of the introduced population (Fig. 1). An uncorrected p-distance matrix was constructed using PAUP 4.0b10 (Swofford 1998) which shows percentage divergence between the seven distinct Dominica haplotypes is presented in Table 1. This information demonstrates mtDNA variation in Dominica indicating the existence of at least seven females in the initially transported population.
The distribution of haplotypes among sites [Table S3(a) and (b)] was not associated with elevation in either Puerto Rico [chi-square 5.261, df = 2, P > 0.05; contingency table shown in Table S3(c) (Supporting information)]or Dominica [chi-square 3.438, df = 2, P > 0.05; Table S3(d) (Supporting information)]. Five microsatellite loci were genotyped for A. cristatellus. The mean number of alleles per locus by island was 11.4 and 15.2 for Dominica and Puerto Rico respectively. As a maximum of 14 alleles were present at two of the five microsatellite loci for pooled Dominican populations [cris 124 and cris 140; Eales et al. (2008); Table S4 (Supporting information)], the minimum possible effective founder population size was seven for this diploid organism.
The AMOVA demonstrated that molecular (microsatellite) variation between Puerto Rico source populations was extremely low (2.54%), thus populations were deemed to be sufficiently similar that allele data from the three source populations could be pooled for the specific purpose of estimating propagule size. The simulation program was run separately for the two most
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
COLONIZATION AND ADAPTIVE POTENTIAL 2863

2864 J. EALES, R. S. THORPE and A. MALHOTRA
             1.00
0.63
0.76
      West PR
                                1.00
H-PR24 (3)
H-PR25 (4) H-PR26 (4)
H-PR27 (4) H-PR28 (5) H-PR29 (5)
H-PR30 (6) H-PR31 (2)
H-PR14 (1) H-PR15 (2) H-PR16 (3) H-PR01 (2) H-DO1 (24)
H-PR17 (7) H-PR18 (4) H-DO2 (16) H-DO3 (1)
H-PR02 (2) H-PR03 (4) H-PR04 (2)
H-DO4 (42) H-DO5 (11)
H-PR05 (4) H-PR06 (4)
H-PR19 (3)
H-PR20 (6) H-PR21 (6)
Central West PR
Central East PR
Outgroup
                        1.00
0.79
H-PR23 (1) H-PR22
H-PR07 (1)
H-PR08 (1)
H-DO6 (1) H-DO7 (3)
H-PR09 (3) H-PR10 (4)
H-PR11 (2) H-PR12 (2) H-PR13 (1)
           1.00
0.98
               0.1
 Fig. 2 Bayesian phylogram of NADH2 sequence data for Puerto Rican and Dominican haplotypes, showing only the section relevant to this study, including the well-supported clades (Central West and Central East Puerto Rico) that contain Dominican haplotypes. Labels H-PR01 to H-PR31 refer to the 25 new haplotypes and six haplotypes (R. Glor, unpublished data) sampled from Puerto Rico that lie within the Dominican clades. Labels H-DO1 to H-DO7 refer to the seven new haplotypes sampled from Dominica. The number of individuals per haplotype genotyped in this study are given in parenthesis. Posterior probabilities are given for major nodes and clades of interest. Symbols are as detailed in the legend for Fig. 1.
variable loci, since the program takes into account the allele frequency distribution of source populations, which differs by locus. The number of individuals for which more than 95% of the 10 000 samples contained a total of at least 14 alleles was 25 for locus cris 124 and 19
individuals for locus cris 140 (Table S5, Supporting information). The number of individuals for which only 5% of the 10 000 samples contained 14 or more alleles was 10 individuals for locus cris 124 and eight individuals for locus cris 140 (Table S5, Supporting information).
Multiple paternity analysis
Although under natural conditions female A. cristatellus produce only single eggs, they do so repeatedly. This study revealed that female A. cristatellus can store sperm for up to 84 days after the most recent mating and produce up to six viable offspring under isolated laboratory conditions (Fig. S1). Multiple paternity was inferred in seven (30.4%) of the 23 progeny groups studied (three or more paternal alleles at two or more loci). Of the remaining 16 groups, seven (30.4%) contained one locus with three paternal alleles and in eight progeny groups (39.2%) no loci had more than two paternal alleles. Hence, 30% is a conservative estimate for the proportion of multiple paternity progeny groups in a population. Based on these data, the average number of paternal genotypes per progeny group is 1.3, thus the average genotypic contribution of a progeny group to the F1 generation is 2.3 genotypes (1 maternal genotype and 1.3 paternal genotypes).
Common garden analysis
Offspring were reared from between 7 and 16 females sampled from each of the eight localities. A histogram to show the number of offspring successfully hatched per female under laboratory conditions is presented in Fig. S1. Mean and SE of trait values for females and F1 progeny are given in Table S6 (Supporting information). The (pooled within-group) least squares regression for estimating heritability indicated a moderate to high, significant association between females and F1 progeny in both CTS (b = 0.133; t = 2.51; P = 0.0142; SE=0.053; df=77; h2 =0.27) and VS (b=0.238; t= 3.51; P = 0.0007; SE = 0.068; df = 77; h2 = 0.48).
The MANOVAs provide further support for these two characters being under genetic control. The three factor MANOVA showed a significant difference between high and low elevation populations overall (F = 7.23; df = 155; P = 0.001), without a significant interaction between generation and elevation (F = 0.509; df = 155; P = 0.602) and no significance with generation (F = 2.234; df = 155; P = 0.111) (Table 2). This is reflected in the results for the individual characters with both the CTS and VS showing a significant difference in elevation (CTS: F=8.757;df=156;P=0.004;VS:F=8.799;d=156; P = 0.003) without a significant interaction between
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

COLONIZATION AND ADAPTIVE POTENTIAL 2865
Table 1 Uncorrected p-distance matrix showing the distance between NADH2 haplotypes unique to Dominica. For comparison, the p-distance among haplotypes within a locality in Puerto Rico may be higher, for example 0.118 (Juncos, four haplotypes) and 0.121 (Mayaguez, nine haplotypes) (data from R. Glor pers. comm.)
 Haplotype H-D1
H-D1 –
H-D2 0.012
H-D3 0.014
H-D4 0.008
H-D5 0.01
H-D6 0.066
H-D7 0.065
H-D2 H-D3
– –
– – 0.011 – 0.016 0.018 0.017 0.019 0.069 0.068 0.068 0.067
H-D4 H-D5
– –
– –
– –
– – 0.003 – 0.066 0.069 0.065 0.068
  Table 2 Common garden analysis MANOVA test results for scalation characters. Roy’s largest root multivariate tests
H-D6 H-D7
– – – – – – – – – – – – 0.005 –
as reported in SPSS 14 was used in
 Test
Multivariate tests
MANOVA
Three factor MANOVA (Female and F1)
Factor ⁄ effect Elevation
F P Significance 7.230 0.001 S
2.234 0.111 NS 0.509 0.602 NS 4.213 0.018 S
8.799 0.003 S 0.000 0.988 NS 0.372 0.543 NS 8.141 0.000 S 4.770 0.032 S 8.757 0.004 S 4.318 0.039 S 0.838 0.361 NS 1.585 0.195 NS 5.498 0.022 S
df1 df2
2 155 2 155 2 155 2 77
1 156 1 156 1 156 3 156 1 78 1 156 1 156 1 156 3 156 1 78
 Two factor MANOVA (F1) Between-subjects effects
VS number
CTS number
Three factor MANOVA (Female and F1)
Two factor MANOVA (F1) Three factor MANOVA
(Female and F1)
Two factor MANOVA (F1)
· elevation
Generation Generation Elevation
Elevation Generation Generation
Transect · elevation Elevation
Elevation
Generation
Generation · elevation Transect · elevation Elevation
· elevation
 generation and elevation (CTS: F = 0.838; df = 156; P = 0.361; VS: F = 0.372; df = 156; P = 0.543). The northern transects generally show more elevation effect than the southern with significant elevation · transect interaction forVS(F=8.141;df=156;P<0.001),butnotCTS (F = 1.585; df = 156; P = 0.195). Similarly, the two factor MANOVA results on the F1 generation reared under common conditions showed a significant difference in elevation overall (F = 4.213; df = 77; P = 0.018) and with individual characters (circum-trunk: F = 5.498; df = 78; P = 0.022; ventral: F = 4.77; df = 78; P = 0.032) [Table 2 and Table S6 (Supporting information)].
The results of the QST–FST comparison for both traits indicate that QST values were consistently higher than FST values for each elevational transect. The site 1 vs. 5 pairwise comparison had an FST of 0.0613, but QST values of 0.7346 for VS and 0.1468 for CTS, the site 2 vs. 6 pairwise comparison had an FST of 0.0047 but QST values of 0.5489 (VS) and 0.9102 (CTS), the site 3 vs. 7 pairwise comparison had an FST of 0.0075 but QST values of 0.0120 (VS) and 0.8570 (CTS), while the site 4 vs. 8 pair-
wise comparison had an FST of 0.0382 but QST values of 0.7346 (VS) and 0.8648 (CTS). The QST ⁄ FST ratios for the VS, from north to south transects, are 12.0, 116.8, 1.6 and 19.2, respectively, while the ratios for CTS are 2.4, 193.7, 114.3 and 22.6, respectively. Hence, in all but two cases QST is one or two orders of magnitude greater than FST.
Discussion
Phylogeographic origin and source of haplotype diversity
The mtDNA haplotype data, combined with locality information indicates that the geographical origin for the Dominica invasion is a small area in the central west region of Puerto Rico (part of the endemic range) and that the Dominican population consists of at least seven mtDNA haplotypes from this area (Appendix S1). The haplotype diversity (Table 1) and microsatellite variation (Eales et al. 2008) naturally found
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

2866 J. EALES, R. S. THORPE and A. MALHOTRA
within single localities within Puerto Rico are compatible with the invasive propogule originating from a single small area within Puerto Rico. Uncorrected mtDNA sequence divergence values of up to 6.9% between Dominican haplotypes are consistent with microsatellite data (Eales et al. 2008) in demonstrating that genetic structure and a weak genetic founder effect exists in the introduced population. The genetic variation is unlikely to result from a large propagule size, since simulations based on allele frequency data indicate a moderately low effective population size (in the region of 19–25 individuals) relative to typically high population densities of Anolis, which is consistent with a minimum estimate of seven females from mtDNA haplotype data and the minimum estimates of seven individuals (14 alleles ⁄ 2) from the microsatellite data. Therefore, the genetic diversity in Dominica is likely to have arisen primarily through the introduction of multiple mtDNA haplotypes (in a single import, since colonization history is recent and well-documented) from a small area in Puerto Rico, particularly the central west PR clade (Fig. 2). Thus, contrary to the predictions of the founder effect, a colonizing population may contain considerable initial genetic diversity, which can arise from the genetic variability within a small geographical area in the native range.
Genetic capacity for adaptation and multiple paternity
The genotypic diversity in an introduced population is principally dependant upon genetic diversity present in the founding population. However, in some organisms, introduced population genetic diversity may be increased by the ability of females to store sperm from several matings. Sperm storage is a well-recognized phenomenon in lizards (Cuellar 1966; Sever & Hamlett 2002) and together with multiple mating by females, documented in Anolis by Tokarz (1998), has significant implications for the potential genetic contribution by female Anolis that have been reproductively active in the source range prior to introduction. Since female A. cristatellus can store sperm for up to 84 days after the most recent mating and produce up to six viable offspring under isolated laboratory conditions, this increases the potential for greater genetic variability in the invasive inoculum. Based on the presence of at least seven sexually mature females in the initially transported founding population and estimates of genotypic contribution from multiple-sired progeny groups (2.3 genotypes), sperm storage and multiple paternity could be responsible for the introduction of up to 16 genotypes in Dominica. Our determination of multiple paternity provides a minimum estimate because the analysis assumed heterozygosity for at least one of the paternal
genotypes. Homozygosity in paternal alleles may have masked multiple paternity, for example when paternal alleles numbered two.
Other recent laboratory studies confirm the prevalence of sperm storage and multiple paternity in wild-caught Anolis (reviewed in Eales et al. 2008). The capacity for the introduction of multiple paternal genotypes by sexually active females in the initially transported population may result in a higher initial effective population size for A. cristatellus than the actual number transported. Thus, the reproductive ecology of Anolis may represent an important mechanism by which introduced populations might minimize the extent of genetic founder effects resulting from demographic bottlenecks. The measures of genetic diversity used here are neutral, providing evidence of colonization history, yet if haplotypic variation is related to variation in ecologically important genetically-controlled traits, the variation described in this study indicates an increased capacity for introduced populations to adaptively respond to environmental variability in new ranges.
Adaptive potential
The MANOVA ⁄ ANOVA analyses show that the low
elevation sites tend to have significantly higher counts for both VS and CTS for both parents and F1 progeny. There is no significant transect · elevation interaction for the multivariate test or for the CTS. Some degree of genetic control of a trait is required for adaptive responses and the results of the regression analysis suggest that both measured phenotypic traits have moderate to high, significant heritability. Moreover, both the two and three way MANOVA ⁄ ANOVA of the common garden data suggests some genetic control of these scalation traits. Combined, these results indicate that genetic factors have an influence on the elevational difference in both scalation traits. The endemic Anolis oculatus has variation in these scalation traits in the same direction over the same elevational cline (Malhotra & Thorpe 1997b), which suggests that the trait divergence in the invasive anole is due to directional natural selection.
The pairwise QST ⁄ FST ratios between low and high elevation sites for the four Dominican transects show that the broad sense QST values for both scalation traits are consistently higher (generally one or two orders of magnitude higher) than the comparable FST value. These ratios are high when compared to comparable ratios in Leinonen et al.’s (2007) review. This suggests that, in general, both of these traits vary with elevation due to selection rather than being selectively neutral. As an exception to this generalization, the QST ⁄ FST ratios are lowest for the F1 VS in the transect comparing sites 3 and 7 and for CTS in the transect comparing
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

sites 2 and 6. In both these cases the change in means is against the overall trend and this may reflect genetic drift. However, given the overall QST ⁄ FST comparison, the MANOVA ⁄ ANOVA results and the parallel change in the sympatric endemic anole, genetic drift is an unlikely explanation for the overall pattern.
With drift excluded, the genetically-based difference in scale number with elevation is likely to be a result of natural selection, although it may also be due to elevational assortment of pre-adapted haplotypes. However, segregation of mtDNA haplotypes by elevation was not supported by the chi-square analysis for either Puerto Rico (source region elevation varies up to 500 m above sea level) or Dominica. The remaining cause of the elevational variation in ventral scale number is response to ecological selection pressure that varies with elevation in Dominica. It is possible that maternal effects are responsible for a proportion of the heritability and elevational variation in F1 progeny in the phenotypic traits; however, raising F2 progeny to eliminate maternal effects significantly increases the time costs and logistical complexity of vertebrate common garden experiments.
This study identifies the geographical source for the introduction of A.cristatellus in Dominica and demonstrates that for single import introductions, genetic variation may result from both a high genetic variability across small geographical scales in source populations, and mechanisms of reproductive ecology (sperm storage and multiple paternity in Anolis). During the early colonization phase and in the absence of secondary introductions, these sources of variation may represent the advantage that successful invaders have over failed colonizers, via the ability to respond to novel selective pressures. Although aspects of theory (Roman & Darling 2007) and the success of admixture invasions (Kolbe et al. 2004) suggest that higher genetic variability may be advantageous to invaders, Roman & Darling (2007) point out that this is not straightforward. This study provides an example of a successful invasion with genetic variability, which is not due to admixture. Our work provides some indication that an elevational cline in adaptive phenotypic traits within the introduced range is likely to result from genetically-based responses to ecological selective pressure. The results are compatible with rapid evolution in Anolis phenotypic traits, as documented for the native Dominican anole (Malhotra & Thorpe 1991b; Thorpe et al. 2005). We propose that these responses are made possible by genetic diversity provided by a genetically variable source region and multiple paternity.
Our study addresses key questions concerning the interactions between ecological and evolutionary processes during the early stages of invasions. The obser-
vation of a rapid adaptive response in approximately ten generations in populations that have retained significant genetic diversity from source populations suggests that a similar response is possible in other recent introductions. This knowledge is vital for the implementation of appropriate management strategies in the conservation issues raised by introduced species. We demonstrate the value of linking molecular analyses with experimental common garden studies, to provide an explanation behind the observed variation in introduced species phenotype. We also show that an appreciation of both introduction history and life history characteristics is essential to elucidate the processes which may facilitate adaptive genetic responses in introduced populations and therefore predict their invasive ability.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Forestry Parks and Wildlife Division, Dominica, W.I., in particular Eric Hypolite and Arlington James, for information and granting of permits necessary for field collection of material. We would like to express deep gratitude to Rich Glor for providing the simulation program used in estimating minimum effective founder population size, and to R. Glor and Jonathan Losos for generously releasing of mtDNA information prior to publishing. We wish to thank anonymous referees for their comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript and David Jones for laboratory work involved in multiple paternity studies. This work was supported by Natural Environment Research Council (Studentship
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
COLONIZATION AND ADAPTIVE POTENTIAL 2867
NER ⁄ S ⁄ C ⁄ 2004 ⁄ 12742 to Wildlife DNA Services.
References
JE), with CASE
sponsorship from

Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
COLONIZATION AND ADAPTIVE POTENTIAL 2869
Supporting information
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
Table S1 Position and elevation of sampling sites in Dominica. Table S2 Number of families at each locality included in the
multiple paternity analysis
Table S3 (a) Haplotype distribution among sites in Dominica (number of individuals sequenced, n = 98). (b) Haplotypes isolated from individuals sampled for this study in Puerto Rico and localities from which individuals were sampled. Frequency of haplotypes genotyped at localities is also shown. Due to failed amplification and low quality of gene products, 111 of the 159 sampled individuals were reliably genotyped. Chi-square test 2 · 3 contingency table showing observed values for Dominican haplotypes. (c) Haplotypes H-D6 and H-D7 were excluded from the chi-square analysis because the frequencies of haplotypes at these sites fails to meet the assumptions of chi-square test. (d) Chi-square test 2 · 3 contingency table showing observed values for Puerto Rico haplotypes. Haplotypes H-D6 and H-D7 were excluded from the chisquare analysis because the frequencies of haplotypes at these sites fails to meet the assumptions of the chi-square test
Table S4 Number of microsatellite alleles by population and locus
Table S5 Results of simulation using source population allele frequency distributions for the most variable loci in the source population, cris 124 and cris 140. Values shown are the proportion of the 10 000 samples that contained at least 14 alleles. For both loci, the proportional value for 61–100 individuals sampled was 1 (results not shown). Values in bold type indicate the critical population sizes at which at least 5% of samples and at which more than 95% of samples, contained at least 14 alleles (smaller and larger values, respectively)
Table S6 Grand mean, SE and mean difference between low and high elevation sites for measured scalation characters
Fig. S1 Histogram of number of offspring per female. Data shown excludes one egg per female that was occasionally lost during the transit from field to laboratory.
Appendix S1 Number of haplotypes.
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
