Syst. Biol. 47(4):545–567,1998
Phylogenetic Congruence and Discordance Among One Morphological and Three Molecular Data Sets from Pontederiaceae
SEANW.GRAHAM,1 JOSHUAR.KOHN,2 BRIANR.MORTON,3 JAMESE.ECKENWALDER,4 ANDSPENCERC.H.BARRETT4
1 Department of Botany, Box 355325, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-5325, USA 2 Department of Biology, University of California at San Diego, California 92093-0116, USA
3 Department of Biological Sciences, Barnard College, Columbia University, New York 10027-6598, USA 4 Department of Botany, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3B2, Canada
Abstract.—A morphological data set and three sources of data from the chloroplast genome (two genes and a restriction site survey) were used to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of the pickerelweed family Pontederiaceae. The chloroplast data converged towards a single tree, presumably the true chloroplast phylogeny of the family. Unrooted trees estimated from each of the three chloroplast data sets were identical or extremely similar in shape to each other and mostly robustly supported. There was no evidence of signi􏰭cant heterogeneity among the data sets, and the few topological differences seen among unrooted trees from each chloroplast data set are probably artifacts of sampling error on short branches. Despite well-documented differences in rates of evolution for different characters in individual data sets, equally weighted parsimony permits accurate reconstructions of chloroplast relationships in Pontederiaceae. A separate morphology-based data set yielded trees that were very different from the chloroplast trees. Although there was substantial support from the morphological evidence for several major clades supported by chloroplast trees, most of the con􏰮icting phylogenetic structure on the morphology trees was not robust. Nonetheless, several statistical tests of incongruence indicate signi􏰭cant heterogeneity between molecules and morphology. The source of this apparent incongruence appears to be a low ratio of phylogenetic signal to noise in the morphological data. [Chloroplast DNA; congruence tests; incongruence; morphology; ndhF; noise; Pontederiaceae; rbcL.]
Good correspondence among trees derived from independent sources of data constitutes strong reciprocal corroboration of accurate phylogenetic inference (reviewed by de Queiroz et al., 1995; Hillis, 1995; Miyamoto and Fitch, 1995). This is the principle of congruence in phylogenetic systematics. Conversely, discordance can serve to highlight instances where subsets of the available evidence have distinctly different rates or modes of evolution (Bull et al., 1993; Huelsenbeck et al., 1994, 1996), or even different phylogenetic histories (reviewed by Doyle, 1992). However, if trees from different data sets are sampling estimates of the true phylogeny, then differences among them may instead re􏰮ect sampling error (Rodrigo et al., 1993; Page, 1996). Avoidance of sampling error is a prime motive for using a large amount of data from diverse sources during phylogenetic reconstruction. With the growing trend towards collecting and combining multiple sources of data in individual phylogenetic studies, there is an increasingly urgent need to distinguish be-
tween tree con􏰮icts attributable to sampling error or other sources of noise, and those attributable to divergent historical signal.
Four phylogenetic data sets are now available for the pickerelweed family Pontederiaceae. A study of chloroplast DNA restriction site variation has recently been published (Kohn et al., 1996), and surveys of nucleotide variation in portions of two chloroplast genes, ndhF and rbcL, are detailed here for the 􏰭rst time. The ndhF survey was performed with primers designed speci􏰭cally for this study. Evidence from rbcL provides strong support for the monophyly of the family (Graham and Barrett, 1995). The fourth phylogenetic study of Pontederiaceae, performed by Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986), was based solely on morphological evidence. The most-parsimonious trees inferred from those data are very different from those inferred from the chloroplast data (Graham and Barrett, 1995; Kohn et al., 1996).
The morphology-based trees of the family are poorly supported. Trees only a few
545
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

546 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 steps longer than the most-parsimonious trees are strikingly different in shape from the shortest trees (Eckenwalder and Barrett, 1986). The morphological data set is by far the smallest in size of all the available data sets, raising the possibility that differences in trees inferred from molecules versus morphology re􏰮ect sampling error in the latter data set rather than con􏰮icting signals. Chloroplast genes are linked with each other, and so all parts of individual chloroplast genomes have the same pedigree within species and the same phylogenetic history among species. Different genealogical histories can therefore be ruled out as a cause of any incongruence among thechloroplastdatasets.However,ratesand modes of evolution are known to vary substantially in different parts of the chloroplast genome. If these processes are suf􏰭ciently strong, they may be a source of the tangible differences in trees that are inferred from separate parts of the chloroplast genome. If differences among trees from individual chloroplast data sets are not well supported, then they too may re􏰮ect sampling error alone.
Until recently, assessment of the degree of congruence among data sets rested almost solely on qualitative comparisons of tree topology (“taxonomic congruence”; Mickevich, 1978). Such visual comparisons of tree shape can still be rewarding, particularly where estimates of the robustness of tree structure are available. Several statistical tests have been used to gauge incongruence among data sets (Templeton, 1983; Kishino and Hasegawa, 1989; Rodrigo et al., 1993; Farris et al., 1994). The relative superiority of individual tests of incongruence was addressed by Lutzoni and Vilgalys (1995) and Cunningham (1997). They found that related tests of incongruence derived from the work of Templeton (1983) and Kishino and Hasegawa (1989) are oversensitive because they can be easily misled by tree structure that re􏰮ects sampling error instead of phylogenetic signal. However, Mason-Gamer and Kellogg (1996) suggested how modi􏰭ed versions of these tests can be used to avoid comparing poorly supported tree structures from different data sets, and hence permit
discrimination between the effects of noise and robustly con􏰮icting signal on differences in tree shape.
In this study, we examined the extent and source of incongruence between three chloroplast data sets and between the chloroplast genome and morphology. The taxonomic, biogeographic, and evolutionary implications of trees inferred from these different data sets have been addressed elsewhere (Eckenwalder and Barrett, 1986; Graham and Barrett, 1995; Kohn et al., 1996; Barrett and Graham, 1997). By examining the robustness and congruence of trees inferred from each data set, we determined whether the differences among them were a consequenceofnoiseinthedata,suchasthatdue to sampling error, or instead re􏰮ected divergent evolutionary processes or histories among the data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Twenty-four taxa (22 species, with 3 varieties of one, Pontederia cordata) from 􏰭ve genera of Pontederiaceae were considered in this study. These taxa represent a substantial fraction of the 35–40 species of the family and include representatives from four major genera (Eichhornia, Heteranthera, Monochoria, and Pontederia), two segregate genera (Reussia and Zosterella) not recognized here, and the monotypic genus Hydrothrix. Apart from two monotypic genera (Scholleropsis and Eurystemon), all taxa not considered here belong taxonomically within the other genera. A single outgroup taxon (Philydrum lanuginosum from Philydraceae) was included. Several lines of morphological and molecular evidence indicate that this family is closely related to Pontederiaceae and may be its sister group (Chase et al., 1993; Davis, 1995; Tillich, 1995).
Four sources of phylogenetic evidence were considered, three from the chloroplast genome. The chloroplast data sets comprise results of a survey of restriction site variation in the chloroplast genome (Kohn et al., 1996) and DNA sequence variation in two chloroplast genes, ndhF and rbcL. Voucher information for the chloroplast data is provided in Kohn et al. (1996). GenBank ac-
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 547
 cession numbers for the DNA sequences presented here are U41573–U41597 (rbcL partial sequences) and U41598–U41622 (ndhF partial sequences). The rbcL locus codes for the large subunit of the photosynthetic protein ribulosebisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (EC 4.1.1.39). The ndhF locus codes for a subunit of an NADH dehydrogenase that may function in the chlororespiratorychain(Rochaix,1997).Thefourth data set is a revision (see Appendix) of a morphological data set of Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986).
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ampli􏰭cations of these genes were performed with use of standard reagents and reaction conditions. Two strands were sequenced for all taxa. With some exceptions, these represent both forward and reverse strands. Single-stranded templates for sequencing were generated in asymmetric PCR reactions by using double-stranded PCR product. Single-stranded DNAs were puri􏰭ed by precipitation with three-􏰭fths volume of 20% PEG 8000, 2.5M NaCl, and were sequenced manually by use of internally situated forwardand reverse-sequencing primers. A 490-bp segment of ndhF was ampli􏰭ed and sequenced by using forward and reverse primers designed for this study (Table 1). This region of ndhF is part of the highly variable 30 -end of the gene (Olmstead and Sweere, 1994; Kim and Jansen, 1995). Primers used for amplifying and sequencing rbcL were designed by Zurawski et al. (1984). A 1,343-bp internal region at the 50 -end of rbcL was sequenced for all taxa, except for Hydrothrix, for which a 1,169-
bp region was sequenced. Length differences were not encountered in the region of rbcL examined, but two short (6-bp) insertions/deletions (indels) were observed in ndhF, one of which was informative. Each entire indel was coded as a single additional character. Two informative characters in the restriction site data may correspond to DNA sequence variation in the ndhF data. Nucleotide characters involved in gain or loss of these restriction sites (three variable nucleotide sites, two of which are informative) were therefore excluded from the ndhF data set in combinations involving this set and the restriction site data.
Maximum parsimony analyses were conducted by using PAUP 3.1.1 (Swofford, 1993). The three chloroplast data sets were each analyzed individually and in all possible combinations. The morphological data were analyzed individually and in combination with the chloroplast data. Heuristic searches were performed by using tree bisection–reconnection (TBR) branchswapping, with MULPARS and “Steepest descent” options activated. All character and character-state changes were equally weighted (cf. Eckenwalder and Barrett, 1986, in which some morphological characters were ordered). Multiple randomaddition replicates were used in all searches to reduce the risk of 􏰭nding only local optima (Maddison, 1991). Because the outgroup was by far the most-divergent taxon in the study (see below), basic searches were repeated both with and without the outgroup included. Prerelease versions of PAUP* 4.0 (d055–d061, kindly provided by
TABLE 1.
Primer namea
ndh2F ndh3Fc ndh4Fc ndh4Rc ndh2Rc ndh1.6R ndh1R
Oligonucleotides used to amplify and sequence a 30 -portion of the chloroplast gene ndhF.
 Primer sequence
50 -ACTCATGCTTATTCGAAAGC
50 -TATTCAATATCGTTATGGGG
50 -CTTTATTCATTGGATCAATAGGAAT 50 -GAGTTAACCATTTTGATAATA
50 -CTATATAACCGCGATTATATGACC 50 -CCTACTCCATTGGTAATTCCAT
50 -AATAAATAAGACGAAATTCGACC
Base pair in ndhFb 1,042–1,061
1,420–1,439 1,655–1,679 1,712–1,732 1,961–1,984 2,066–2,087 2,134–2,156
  a F = forward strand, R = reverse strand. bReference sequence = Oryza sativa.
c Used as a sequencing primer.
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

548 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 David Swofford) were used in several of the congruence tests described below.
Tree resolution was measured as the number of fully resolved nodes and the number of nonterminal branches (taxon partitions; clades on rooted trees) retained in strict consensuses. Nonparametric bootstrap analyses (Felsenstein, 1985) were performed to estimate branch robustness. Tree support was taken as the average bootstrap support of branches retained in the strict consensus of the shortest trees from each maximum parsimony analysis (Olmstead and Sweere, 1994). Hillis and Bull (1993) demonstrated that bootstrap analysis provides biased, but usually conservative, estimates of the “accuracy” of individual clades, which they de􏰭ned as the probability that a result represents the true phylogeny. Accurate branches tend to be those supported by 70% or more of the replicates, so long as rates of change are not very high or very unequal among lineages. While recognizing that there is an element of arbitrariness in de􏰭ning classes of robustness for different levels of bootstrap support, we refer to branches with < 50%, between 50% and 70%, and > 70% bootstrap support as poorly, moderately, and robustly supported, respectively. Other methods have been used to assess clade support. One nonstatistical method is to derive indices for branches that describe their stability (persistence) in trees less optimal than the shortest ones (Bremer, 1988). Empirical comparisons of bootstrapping versus decay indices suggest that these measures are correlated (Olmstead and Sweere, 1994), and so we used only one of them in this study.
Inference of Congruence and Incongruence among Data Sets
Taxonomic congruence.—A variety of metrics can be used to gauge the dissimilarity of different trees to each other (reviewed by Penny and Hendy, 1985; Page, 1993; Steel and Penny, 1993). One of these, the partition metric (dS), measures the total number of unique taxon partitions observed in pairwise comparisons of trees. A taxon partition describes the two sets of taxa split by a single branch on a rooted or unrooted tree. The dis-
tribution of this metric is highly skewed towards a maximum distance of 2n–6 symmetric differences for n taxa (Steel and Penny, 1993), so random pairs of trees are extremely unlikely to have a low partition distance. Such distributions of tree-to-tree distances can be used to assess whether or not trees inferred from different data sets are more similar to each other than would be expected by chance (Penny et al., 1982). The distribution for 24-taxon trees was estimated from 999 random trees. We used all three modes of random-tree generation (equiprobable trees, random joining, and random partitioning) in MacClade 3.0 (Maddison and Maddison, 1992), each of which generated one-third of the 999 trees. All three modes were considered since each can result in somewhat different distributions of tree shape (Maddison and Maddison, 1992).
Pairwise tree-to-tree distances were determined in PAUP for all of the unrooted trees from the parsimony analyses. Large matrices summarizing tree-to-tree distances are hard to digest. They can be converted into a “tree of trees” by using the neighborjoining algorithm in PHYLIP 3.5c (Felsenstein, 1995) to summarize graphically the overall similarity among the shortest trees. Using phenograms to summarize shapes of trees is not new (reviewed by Podani and Dickinson, 1984), although its use in addressing congruence is (see Dickinson et al., 1988, for a multivariate approach). The summary phenogram is a synopsis of tree-to-tree dissimilarity; it can be used to assess at a glance whether there are trees in one data set that are more similar to trees in the same data set than those from other data sets (i.e., they cluster together) or vice versa (they form intermingled clusters).
Data congruence.—Farris et al. (1994) described a simple test, the incongruence length difference (ILD) test (also known as the partition-homogeneity test), for measuring the signi􏰭cance of incongruence among data sets. The test (implemented in PAUP* ) randomly repartitions characters from two or more data sets into new data sets as large as each of the original data sets. Shortest trees are estimated for the shuf􏰮ed data partitions. If the sum of tree lengths for the shuf-
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 549
 􏰮ed data sets is greater than the sum for the original data sets for a critical number of replicates, the null hypothesis of congruence is rejected and one (or more) of the original data sets is taken to be signi􏰭cantly distinct from the others.
The penalty in parsimony steps required to 􏰭nd suboptimal trees with one data set that are optimal for another data set will tend to be small when the two data sets are highly congruent (Swofford, 1991). Several related parsimony-based tests (e.g., Templeton, 1983; Kishino and Hasegawa, 1989) can be used to assess, for a given data set, the signi􏰭cance of the difference in length between a pair of trees. Both tests are implemented in PAUP* . When the two trees compared are from rival data sets, the signi􏰭canceofthedifferenceinlengthbetween the trees can be used to evaluate congruence (e.g., Larson, 1994; Paterson et al., 1995; Mason-Gamer and Kellogg, 1996; Cunningham, 1997).
In Templeton’s (1983) method, differences in the number of steps required for individual characters between rival trees are used in a Wilcoxon’s signed-ranks test to determine the signi􏰭cance of the total difference in length between the trees (see Larson, 1994). A method for estimating the variance (across characters) of the difference in the number of steps between two trees is described in Appendix C of Kishino and Hasegawa (1989). This estimate can be used to perform a paired t-test, to decide whether the trees are signi􏰭cantly different in length. When either test is used to assess congruence, reconstructions of character evolution on the rival trees are considered for one data set at a time. Reciprocal tests using both data sets should be performed, in case any incongruence is in one direction only. To avoid confusion, we refer to the data set being used to perform these tests as the “test” data set, designate its trees as the “test trees,” and use the adjective “rival” (following Mason-Gamer and Kellogg, 1996) to describe the alternative data set or its trees.
More than one most-parsimonious tree is often inferred in phylogenetic analysis. The more shortest trees there are, the more pairwise tests are possible, and the greater
the danger of making Type I errors and hence of 􏰭nding false incongruence among trees. However, correcting the experimentwise error rate when making such multiple tests is not desirable, because the multiple most-parsimonious trees from a single data set are not statistically independent of each other, given the large amount of topology they typically have in common. To minimize the number of tests, we chose a single representative test tree from among the most-parsimonious trees. The test tree chosen to represent each individual chloroplast data set was, to err on the conservative side, the one that was the most-distinct in shape from the trees in rival chloroplast data sets. For comparisons of the morphological and molecular trees, each test tree was picked arbitrarily,becausetreesinferredfromeach data set were all highly distinct from those from the other data set.
Branches that are weakly supported by particular data sets typically represent only ambiguously supported patterns within that data set. Signi􏰭cant but spurious con􏰮ict among data sets can be inferred with use of Templeton’s test, or of the Kishino– Hasegawa test, if the rival most-parsimonious tree includes con􏰮icting but poorly supported clades (Mason-Gamer and Kellogg, 1996). For each data set considered, Mason-Gamer and Kellogg therefore suggested comparing its most-parsimonious tree(s) with a single summary tree that incorporated only well-supported nodes on rival trees. The most-parsimonious tree(s) from a data set can then be compared only with phylogenetic structure that is well supported by the rival data set. We used MacClade to construct constraint trees that summarize the phylogenetic structure supported at various con􏰭dence levels in the bootstrap analysis of each data set. The cutoffs used were bootstrap values of 50% and greater, 60% and greater, and so on, up to 95% and greater support. Branches not supported at or above a particular level of bootstrap support were reduced to polytomies on the constraint tree.
Polytomies in PAUP are interpreted as multiple speciation events (hard polytomies) in calculations of tree length. A hard
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

550 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 polytomy tends to contribute to increased tree length, because each surrounding node is taken to be independently connected to the polytomy, and so changes in each character along descendant branches are counted as multiple independent events (Maddison, 1989). A constraint tree that has many polytomies, but otherwise is topologically consistent with the test tree, will consequently tend to be signi􏰭cantly different from the test tree. Because we interpret polytomies as re􏰮ecting a lack of resolving power by the rival data set (i.e., as soft polytomies), their effect on tree length can be misleading. This is another source of spurious incongruence between data sets. To avoid this effect, the polytomies may be resolved in a manner consistent with the test data set, to the maximum extent that this is possible while still maintaining the constraint tree’s structure. In PAUP this can be achieved by using the rival constraint tree as a topological constraint in tree searches that use the test data set. The shortest tree(s) satisfying this constraint can then be used as the rival tree(s) in comparisons with the test tree.
To examine the behavior of extremely noisy data sets in tests of congruence with the molecular data, we constructed 20 small random data sets, using the “Fill random” function in MacClade. Each data set
consisted of 30 four-state characters, with an equiprobable distribution of character states. The random data sets thus contained approximately the same number of informative characters as the morphological data. Heuristic searches were used to 􏰭nd shortest trees for these data sets, and bootstrap analyses were performed to determine how often one found robustly supported clades with such data. Each random data set was tested against the moderately to strongly supported structure on the molecular trees in the manner described above and was also assessed for incongruence with the molecular data by using the Incongruence-Length Difference (ILD) test.
RESULTS
Tree Resolution and Support
Basic tree statistics for unrooted trees from the analyses of the individual and combined data sets are presented in Table 2. Both chloroplast genes yielded approximately the same number of informative characters, although almost three times more sequence was examined for rbcL than for ndhF. Taken together, the two sequence data sets had approximately the same number of informative characters as the restriction site data. The morphological data set had the small-
TABLE 2. Summary statistics for phylogenetic trees of Pontederiaceae (ingroup taxa only) derived from individual and combined analyses of the chloroplast and morphological data sets. CI = consistency index;
RI = retention index.
 informative No. Analysis characters Lengtha trees
ndhF partial sequence datae 59 144 9 rbcL partial sequence data 61 168 48 Restriction site (RS) data 104 299 10 Combined ndhF + rbcL datae 120 313 4 Combined ndhF + RS datae,f 161 440 8 Combined rbcL + RS data 165 468 2 All molecular data combined e,f 222 609 4 Morphological data 33 121 5 All data combinede,f 255 748 12
a Including autapomorphies.
nonterminal branchesb
17 (14) 15 (12) 18 (16) 19 (18) 18 (16) 20 (20) 19 (18) 19 (19) 17 (14)
CIc CIa
0.628 0.708 0.576 0.685 0.454 0.582 0.598 0.693 0.507 0.620 0.496 0.618 0.525 0.637 0.474 0.496 0.499 0.599
No. No.
Mean bootstrap
RI valued
0.833 78 0.820 77 0.718 80 0.824 84 0.757 88 0.757 88 0.775 90 0.715 52 0.749 94
  b In strict consensus trees (number of fully resolved nodes given in parentheses), of a maximum of 21 nonterminal branches and 22 fully resolved nodes for 24 taxa.
c Excluding autapomorphies.
d Based on branches observed in strict consensus trees (including those with < 50% bootstrap support). e Including two indels in ndhF.
f Excluding two informative and one variable but noninformative character in ndhF.
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 551
 est number of informative characters of any individual data set.
Tree resolution and support generally increased with increasing size of the uncombined or combined molecular data sets (Table 2; Figs. 1, 2). From 12 to 20 fully resolved nodes were retained in the strict consensuses of the molecular trees. The mean bootstrap support ranged from 77% for the rbcL data alone, to ~ 90% for several of the pairwise and fully combined chloroplast data sets. Despite the small number of characters in the morphological data set, its strict consensus tree was highly resolved (Table 2; Fig. 3a). However, its average bootstrap support (52%) was much lower than for any of the molecular data sets. When all the data were combined, the resulting strict consensus tree was somewhat poorer in resolution than the combined molecular tree (with 14 and 18 fully resolved nodes, respectively), and its average bootstrap support was marginally higher (94%, compared with 90%).
The strict consensuses and representative shortest trees from the phylogenetic analyses are a posteriori rooted on the same branch to emphasize the very high degree of topological similarity among all trees found in analyses of the molecular data (Figs. 1, 2, 3b) in comparison with the morphological data (Fig. 3a). This rooting is that found in the combined analysis of the sequence data (see Graham and Barrett, 1995), but different data sets and data-set combinations found different root locations. Bootstrap support is reported for each branch on the strict consensus trees (Figs. 1–3, left trees). Representative shortest trees (right trees) are included to illustrate branch lengths, computed by using ACCTRAN optimization with respect to this rooting. There were 6 fully resolved (dichotomous) nodes and 11 nonterminal branches in the strict consensus of all trees from separate and combined analyses of the chloroplast data sets, but only 1 fully resolved node and 5 nonterminal branches when shortest trees from morphology were included in the consensus (Fig. 4).
Bootstrap support for branches seen in strict consensus trees for individual or combined analyses of the three chloroplast data sets increased with combination of the data
sets (summarized in Fig. 5a). Moderately to well-supported branches in the combined analysis were typically moderately to well supported by each of the individual chloroplast data sets, even in several instances where these branches were not seen on their strict consensus trees. In total, 11 of the 13 best-supported branches in the combined tree had > 50% bootstrap support from all three individual data sets. Bootstrap support of individual branches was typically greater for the combined data set than for any of the individual data sets. Support for a few branches unique to (and not well supported on) individual strict consensus trees decreased substantially or disappeared in the combined analysis of the chloroplast data.
The strict consensus tree from the analysis of the morphological data was the only unrooted tree in this study in which any branches had < 50% bootstrap support (10 of 19 branches; Fig. 3a). However, of nine branches with > 50% bootstrap support, six were also moderately to strongly supported by the combined chloroplast data (summarized in Fig. 5b). For all six clades, the level of bootstrap support was lower in the morphological than in the molecular analysis. Several of these clades are important taxonomic groups, including the genera MonochoriaandPontederia.Bootstrapsupportfora clade consisting of Heteranthera sensu lato (incorporating Hydrothrix) had just under 50% bootstrap support from the morphological data (Fig. 3a; branch o in Fig. 5b).
Most of the unique branches on the morphological strict consensus tree had < 50% bootstrap support from that data, and no bootstrap support from the molecular data or in the combined analysis of all the data (branches ac and ae–ak in Fig. 3a; omitted from Fig. 5b). The remaining unique branches on the morphological strict consensus tree (branches aa, ab, and ad) had little or no support when all the data were combined. Bootstrap support for most branches in the molecular trees changed very little upon combination with the morphological data (Fig. 5b). Only four branches showed even moderate changes in bootstrap support when the morphological data were added
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

552 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
  FIGURE 1. Results of parsimony analyses for three individual data sets from Pontederiaceae, based on variation in the chloroplast genes ndhF (a) and rbcL (b), and restriction-site variation in the chloroplast genome (c). Trees on the left side are strict consensus trees. Nonterminal branches marked with letters (p, u, x, y, z) are unique to that strict consensus tree; branch w (c) is also seen in Figure 3. Bootstrap values are indicated above branches. Asterisks indicate branches for which bootstrap support dropped by $ 20% when the outgroup (Philydraceae) was included in the analysis. R = root position(s) indicated by the outgroup. Each tree on the right side is one of the most-parsimonious trees for that data set and is used to demonstrate branch lengths.
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 553
  FIGURE 2. Results of parsimony analyses for a combined chloroplast data set comprising three chloroplast data sets from Pontederiaceae. The tree on the left side is a strict consensus tree. Nonterminal branches marked with letters (a–o, q–t) are also found on other strict consensus trees (Figs. 1, 3). Bootstrap values are indicated above branches. Asterisks indicate branches for which bootstrap support dropped by $ 20% when the outgroup was included in the analysis. R = root position indicated by the outgroup. The tree on the right side is one of the most-parsimonious trees and is used to demonstrate branch lengths.
to the three chloroplast data sets. Two of these represented improvements in bootstrap support (branches l and w). Support for a third branch (s), which was fairly robustly supported by the chloroplast data, decreased to < 50% upon addition of the morphological data. Support for an alternative arrangement of taxa in this part of the tree (branch z) rose to just under 50% (Fig. 5b). This branch was also moderately supported by the ndhF data. Support for two alternative arrangements at the base of Heteranthera s. l. (branches p and v) hovered around the 50% mark with or without inclusion of the morphological data.
All trees presented in the Figures and Tables include ingroup taxa only. Inclusion of the outgroup did not resolve where the root of the family is. In several cases, no single most-parsimonious root position was found (Figs. 1a, 3a; the combined analysis of ndhF and restriction site data, not shown here). In others, a single most-parsimonious root position was found, but this position differed among data sets (cf. Figs. 1–3). When the outgroup was included in analyses involving the molecular data, a decline of 20% or more in bootstrap support was always seen for one or more of the branches neighboring the root or roots and nowhere else on the
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

554 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
  FIGURE 3. Results of parsimony analyses for the morphological data and all current data sets from Pontederiaceae combined. Trees on the left side are strict consensus trees. Bootstrap values are indicated above branches. Each tree on the right side is one of the most-parsimonious trees for that data set and is used to demonstrate branch lengths. R = root position(s) indicated by the outgroup. (a) The morphological data. Nonterminal branches marked with letters (aa–ak) are unique to this strict consensus tree. Several other rootings were found (not shown) that bisected branches not seen on trees that were inferred by using only taxa in Pontederiaceae. (b) All four data sets combined. Asterisks indicate branches for which bootstrap support dropped by $ 20% with the outgroup included in this analysis.
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 555
  FIGURE 4. Strict consensus trees of all shortest unrooted trees from the single and various combined analyses of the three chloroplast (cp) data sets (left tree) and of all the data sets (right tree).
trees (asterisked branches in Figs. 1, 2, 3b). For the morphological data, the outgroup indicated multiple most-parsimonious roots, including several branches not seen in the unrooted analysis of this data set. For all data sets, the root was supported by no less than 56%, and usually < 50% of bootstrap replicates (results not shown). Inclusion of the outgroup taxon also resulted in loss of resolution, as measured by the number of nonterminal branches or fully resolved nodes in the strict consensus trees (results not shown). The single branch leading to the outgroup taxon accounted for 6–9% of total tree length for the morphological data, and 21–31% of tree length for the other cases, indicating that inference of root position is
probably adversely affected by long-branch attraction for most or all of the data sets.
Taxonomic Congruence
A neighbor-joining tree summarizing the topological similarity of all most-parsimonious unrooted chloroplast-based trees is presented in Figure 6a. The summary tree demonstrates that all of the trees from the individual and combined chloroplast data sets are very similar, and in some cases, identical. Three distinct clusters on the summary tree involve trees from the rbcL data set, from the ndhF data set, and from these two data sets combined. For the restriction site data set and most other combinations of the chloroplast data sets, the individual shortest trees
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

556 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
  FIGURE 5. Spectrum of bootstrap support for branches found in strict consensus trees of Pontederiaceae. (a) The three individual chloroplast data sets (ndhF, rbcL, restriction site) and the three chloroplast data sets combined. (b) The morphological data, the combined chloroplast data, and all four data sets combined. Branches seen on at least one strict consensus tree (a–ad; Figs. 1–3) are ranked according to their support in the combined chloroplast analysis, where this exists. Most branches with < 50% support on the morphology-based tree (ac, ae–ak) have no support from the molecular or combined analysis and so are omitted. Bootstrap values < 1% are also omitted. Branch v is included in (b) even though it was not retained on any strict consensus tree, because it had just under 50% bootstrap support when all data were combined. It corresponds to the following taxon partition: (Hydrothrix gardneri, Heteranthera oblongifolia, Heteranthera zosterifolia, Heteranthera seubertiana, Heteranthera dubia).
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 557
  FIGURE 6. Neighbor-joining trees summarizing dissimilarity in tree shape as measured by the partition metric (number of symmetric differences). The phenograms are midpoint rooted for compactness. (a) A neighbor-joining tree of all shortest unrooted trees from analyses involving each single, and all possible two-way and three-way combinations of the three chloroplast data sets. The ndhFand rbcL-derived trees group into distinct clusters and are highlighted in labeled boxes. Other most-parsimonious trees are individually labeled according to the data set or data-set combination from which they were derived. The three most distinct trees in each chloroplast data set (used as test trees in Table 4) are indicated with solid arrows. A restriction site tree converged on by three other data-set combinations that include this data set is indicated with an open arrow. (b) A neighbor-joining tree of all shortest unrooted trees from analyses involving the combined chloroplast data, the morphological data, and all the data combined. Individual trees are labeled according to the data set they were derived from. The test trees used in Table 5 are indicated with solid arrows.
were typically more similar to trees from other data sets than to other shortest trees from the same data set. This is re􏰮ected in intermingling of these trees across a large portion of the summary phenogram. The phenogram also indicates cases where various data-set combinations yielded shortest trees identical to some of the restriction site trees. In one case, three different data-set combinations yielded the same topology as one of the shortest restriction site trees (see Fig. 6a; open arrow).
This tree topology (Fig. 1c, 2; right tree) is also the closest in shape of the restriction site trees to the cluster of trees found by the combined ndhF and rbcL data. The distance between the former tree (Fig. 6a) and each of the four trees in this cluster is very small, approximately four symmetric differences. Two of the four trees found from the combined ndhF and rbcL data are fully bifurcated, and all of the restriction site trees are fully bifurcated. The smallest possible distance between two nonidentical but fully bi-
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

558 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 furcated trees is two symmetric difference units (scale bar in Fig. 6a; many trees on the phenogram are only one symmetric difference unit apart because they differ from each other in a single minor polytomy). The two data sources used to infer these trees, the restriction site data and the combined sequence data, should be completely independent from each other, apart from their shared history. A very conservative estimate of the upper bounds of the probability of 􏰭nding a pair of fully bifurcated trees from different data sets that are this similar by chance can be estimated from Table 4 of Hendy et al. (1984). The distribution has been calculated for up to 16 taxa. For 16 taxa and four symmetric differences, the probability is 1.87  ́ 10–12 . The lower bound is the probability of 􏰭nding two identical trees. For 24taxon trees, this is 1.77  ́ 10–27 (see CavalliSforza and Edwards, 1967).
A demonstration that the morphological data are overwhelmed in combination with the chloroplast data is the near or actual identity of chloroplast trees that include and exclude the morphological data (Fig. 6b). In contrast, trees inferred from morphology alone are the most-distinctive topologies found in any analysis, and a large distance (~ 26–27 symmetric differences) separates them from the trees inferred from the molecular data. However, even though they are highly distinct from the molecular trees, the morphological trees are still more similar to the molecular trees than would be expected by chance (Table 3). In comparison, the smallest distance observed among 999 random trees was 32 symmetric difference units, representing a very small fraction of all possible pairwise comparisons (Table 3).
The summary phenogram portrays relationships among different tree topologies in a hierarchical manner. The validity of using a hierarchical approach for summarizing tree dissimilarity was assessed from the correlation of the raw matrix of treeto-tree distances to a secondary matrix of the tree-to-tree distances on the summary phenogram (cophenetic correlation, rCS , of Sneath and Sokal, 1973; calculations performed with NYTSYS-pc version 1.80, Rohlf, 1993). For the phenogram in Figure 6a,
TABLE 3. Distribution of partition metric, dS , for 24-taxon trees estimated by using 999 random trees.
 dS
(symmetric differences)
0–30 32 34 36 38 40 42
% of comparisons at this distance
0 0.001 0.010 0.184 2.11
17.6 80.2
  rCS was 0.940 (P < 0.01; approximate Mantel t-test). For the phenogram in Figure 6b, rCS was 0.993 (P < 0.01). A large degree of the hierarchy present in the latter phenogram results from a single very long branch separating the morphological trees from the other trees since, with regard to the morphology-based trees alone, rCS was 0.394 (P > 0.10). However, the low degree of hierarchy among the morphological trees in the phenogram is also suggested by the phenogram itself, since several branches in this part of the tree have nearly zero length. For the remaining trees considered in Figure 6b, rCS was 0.809 (P < 0.01). These lines of evidence demonstrate substantial hierarchy in the distribution of tree-to-tree distances and validate the use of hierarchical (phenogrambased) summaries of taxonomic congruence among trees (see Rohlf and Fisher, 1968).
Character Congruence
The ILD test indicated no signi􏰭cant heterogeneity among the three individual chloroplast data sets (P = 0.97). The results of Templeton tests were very similar to the Kishino–Hasegawa tests, so only the latter are presented here (Tables 4–6). Instead of reporting results for cutoffs representing different levels of bootstrap support, only the lowest cutoff that yielded nonsigni􏰭cant results (or failing that, the $ 95% cutoff) is reported (Tables 4–6). The lower the cutoff, the more phylogenetic structure is included in the rival constraint tree, and the greater the likelihood of a signi􏰭cant difference between the test tree and trees that satisfy the rival constraints. Thus, if the 􏰭rst cutoff with a nonsigni􏰭cant result was at the 60% level,
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 559
 TABLE 4. Assessment of congruence among chloroplast data sets with use of the Kishino–Hasegawa test. A most-parsimonious tree from each data set was tested against trees found by using constraints consistent with the phylogenetic structure supported by the rival chloroplast data sets.
 ndhF data Tree 1 of 9 (144 steps)
rbcL data Tree 27 of 48 (169 steps)
RS dataa Tree 3 of 10 (299 steps)
ndhF $ 50
17 7 8
3.72–4.23 0.032–0.059
  Supportforstructure considered in constraint tree (%)
No. branches in constraint treeb
No. trees found in constrained search
Length increase of constrained vs. test trees (steps)
SD of differencec Pc
rbcL
$ 50
16 2 1
1.73 0.564
RS
$ 50
19 3 3
2.23 0.180
ndhF $ 50
17 2 3
3.00 0.318
RS
$ 50
19 1 1
2.65 0.706
rbcL $ 50
16 1 1
3.32 0.764
ndhF $ 60
14 5 2
2.45–3.16 0.415–0.528
 a RS= Restriction site data.
b Nonterminal branches with this level of support on the bootstrap majority-rule consensus tree. c Range in this value where different among trees found in constrained searches.
for example, cutoffs at higher levels of bootstrap support did not yield signi􏰭cant results (results not shown).
Each chloroplast data set was congruent with the rival data sets when the cutoff was set as low as 50–60% (Table 4). This is not surprising, given that most moderately to
well-supported branches are supported by all three data sets, and only a few moderately supported branches are unique to individual chloroplast data sets (Fig. 5a). For the restriction site data, the test tree was signi􏰭cantly different from the ndhF constraints for the $ 50% cutoff but not for the $ 60% cut-
TABLE 5. Assessment of congruence between chloroplast (cp) data and morphological data determined with the Kishino–Hasegawa test. A most-parsimonious tree from each data set was tested against trees found by using constraints consistent with the phylogenetic structure supported by the rival data set.
  Support for structure considered in constraint tree (%)
No. branches in constraint treea
No. trees found in constrained search
Length increase of
constrained vs. test trees (steps)
SD of differenceb Pb
$
Combined cp data Tree 1 of 4 (609 steps) vs. morphology
50 $ 60 9 6 1 2
19 0
$ 50
20
1
19
6.59 0.006
Morphological data Tree 1 of 5 (121 steps) vs. combined cp
$ 95
12
6
14
5.67–6.02 0.018–0.025
4.98 0–2.00 0.0001 1.00
 a Nonterminal branches with this level of support on the bootstrap majority-rule consensus tree. b Range in this value where different among trees found in constrained searches.
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

560 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 TABLE 6. Use of the Kishino–Hasegawa test to show that random data are incongruent with phylogenetic structure well supported by the chloroplast (cp) data. Results for two representative random data sets are shown here. In each case, a single most-parsimonious tree from the random data set was tested against trees found by using constraints consistent with the phylogenetic structure that is well supported by the molecular data.
 Random data set 8 Tree 1 of 1 (315 steps) vs. combined cp
Random data set 20 Tree 1 of 2 (320 steps) vs. combined cp
$ 95 12
6
53 11.9–13.0
0.0001–0.0003
 Support for structure considered in constraint tree (%)
No. branches in constraint treea
No. trees found in constrained search
Length increase of constrained vs. test tree (steps)
SD of differenceb Pb
$
7.53–8.68 < 0.0001
95 12
9
54
 a Nonterminal branches with this level of support on the bootstrap majority-rule consensus tree. b Range in this value where different among trees found in constrained searches.
off. Three branches on the ndhF tree have no or very poor support from the other chloroplast data sets (branches x, y, and z; Figs. 1a, 5a). These do not represent serious con􏰮icts between the chloroplast data sets, if we take 70% as the cutoff for strongly supported branches.
The ILD test indicated that the morphological data were signi􏰭cantly distinct from the three combined chloroplast data sets (P = 0.01). However, for the chloroplast data, the Kishino–Hasegawa test indicated no serious con􏰮ict between the test tree and a tree structure that was moderately to strongly supported by bootstrap analysis of the morphological data (signi􏰭cant P values at the $ 50% cutoff, but not at the $ 60% cutoff; Table 5). Only two branches unique to the morphological data lay between these two bootstrap support values (branches aa and ab; Figs. 3a, 6b). These do not represent serious con􏰮icts with the molecular data, if we take 70% as the cutoff for strongly supported branches. However, a strikingly different pattern was observed when the test was performed in the opposite direction. For the morphological data, the Kishino– Hasegawa test indicated signi􏰭cant con􏰮ict between the morphology test tree and moderately to strongly supported structure on the molecular trees (Table 5). Signi􏰭cant in-
congruence was indicated even at the $ 95% cutoff (only 12 nodes on the molecular tree have this much support).
Incongruence between Chloroplast Data and Random Data
The ILD test indicated signi􏰭cant incongruence of individual random data sets with the molecular data. Each of the 20 random data sets was signi􏰭cantly distinct from the molecular data, at P < 0.01. Only 2 of the 20 random data sets had some branches supported by > 50% of bootstrap replicates. Two branches on one tree had 51% and 59% bootstrap support, and one branch on the other tree was supported by 56% of bootstrap replicates. By the Kishino–Hasegawa test, the molecular data were incongruent with this structure (P < 0.0001 in both cases). The test tree was the same chloroplast tree as that used in Table 5. However, the molecular data set was not incongruent with any well-supported structure on the trees inferred from the random data sets, because there were no clades on the random trees supported by > 70% of the bootstrap replicates. In the reciprocal analysis, the 20 random data sets were incongruent with moderately to strongly supported structure on the molecular trees by the Kishino–Hasegawa test. Con􏰮ict was
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 561
 signi􏰭cant for all 20 random data sets when each random data set and a test tree from it were tested against structure supported by 95% or more bootstrap replicates on the molecular constraint tree (P values all
do not seem to be in the Felsenstein zone. Thus, the only convincing explanation for their congruence is the historical signal they share in common. The near-identity of trees inferred from the different data sets is strong evidence that these modest samples of the chloroplast genome are suf􏰭cient for inferring its phylogenetic history very accurately (see Hillis, 1995).
The unrooted chloroplast trees are highly congruent, despite different rates and modes of evolution in different parts of this genome. Our restriction site survey spans both single-copy and inverted-repeat regions, the latter region being known to evolve at a substantially slower rate than the rest of the chloroplast genome (Jansen and Palmer, 1987; Wolfe et al., 1987). Rates of restriction site change also are affected by variation among codon positions in the rates of nucleotide substitution and by differences in transition and transversion rates (Albert et al., 1992). These rates can vary from gene to gene. For example, the pattern of change among codon positions differs between rbcL and ndhF (Olmstead et al., 1998; and see Albert et al., 1993; Kim and Jansen, 1995). Combining data sources with substantially different rates or modes of evolution is potentially undesirable (Bull et al., 1993; Huelsenbeck et al., 1994, 1996; but see Chippendale and Weins, 1994; Nixon and Carpenter, 1996) unless weighting schemes can be identi􏰭ed to take account of the different evolutionary processes in different subsets of the data (e.g., Miyamoto et al., 1994; Allard and Carpenter, 1996; Cunningham, 1997).
However, if all characters change suf􏰭ciently slowly, they may be equally weighted during phylogenetic inference, even though they do not actually change with equal probability (Felsenstein 1981, 1983). The extreme congruence of the chloroplast data attests that equal weighting is suf􏰭cient (here at least) for accurate phylogenetic reconstruction. This should be reassuring to others using equally weighted parsimony to reconstruct phylogenies at this taxonomic level with chloroplast data. Whether or not the root of the family can be accurately inferred by using the chloroplast
0.0003; the results for two representative cases are summarized in Table 6).
DISCUSSION
Accuracy of the Phylogenetic Inferences
Finding trees as similar as some of those inferred from different chloroplast data sets is extremely unlikely (1.77  ́ 10–27 < P < 1.87  ́ 10–12 ). This seems to provide extremely strong evidence that the different data sets are rapidly converging towards a single estimate of the chloroplast’s phylogenetic history in Pontederiaceae. Are there any other possible explanations for the nearidentity of the trees inferred from different parts of the chloroplast genome?
One assumption of the parsimony criterion is that all characters evolved independently from each other. This is a potentially dangerous assumption to make when linked characters are used to infer organismal history (reviewed by Doyle, 1992). It is, however, a reasonable assumption for inferring the phylogeny of the linkage group in question (the chloroplast genome), unless there are strong functional correlations between many individual chloroplast characters, which is improbable. One conceivable source of spurious congruence is long-branch attraction (Hillis, 1995). Long branches tend to attract each other, if multiple changes on them are substantially more likely than single changes on neighboring short branches (Felsenstein, 1978, 1983; Hendy and Penny, 1989). Reconstructions of character evolution indicate that most informative characters change only once or twice across the entire tree (Table 7), and few branches in the chloroplast trees are especially long relative to other branches (Figs. 1, 2; right trees). This suggests a low probability of multiple change on most or all of the 45 branches on the unrooted trees, for most of the informative characters. The chloroplast data sets for Pontederiaceae therefore
#
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

562 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 TABLE 7. Distribution of character-state change classes on the 24-taxon tree (right side) in Figure 2.
of extreme lability in vegetative characters in these aquatic plants. Despite evidence that vegetative characters are more homoplasious than the reproductive characters in the family, consistency indices for the different kinds of morphological characters are not unusually low (at least on the morphological trees), given the number of taxa in our study (Barrett and Graham, 1997).
A high overall level of homoplasy need not in itself result in less-robust or moreambiguous phylogenetic estimation (e.g., Sanderson and Donoghue, 1989; Jansen et al., 1990). The level of homoplasy in the restriction site data set is very similar to the morphological data set (Table 2), yet the latter data set is overwhelmed by the former when these two data sources are combined (results not shown), and the former data yield robustly supported trees that are congruent with the other chloroplast evidence (Table 4). The lack of robustness of trees inferred from the morphological data set thus seems to be a consequence of its relatively small size, not its level of homoplasy. Indeed, there is a signi􏰭cant correlation (r = 0.826; P < 0.01) between the mean bootstrap support by a data set for its trees and the number of informative characters, across the nine data sets and data-set combinations considered in Table 2. This correlation should be treated cautiously, given that 􏰭ve of these nine data sets are combinations of the other four, but it does suggest that sampling error is a major source of noise in the morphological data. Increasing the number of morphological characters to match the number of characters in either single-gene data set ought to substantially improve both the robustness of a morphology-based phylogeny of the family and the ability to critically evaluate potential con􏰮icts between morphological and molecular data sets.
In addition to sampling error and multiple substitutions on very long branches, common sources of noise in molecular data include poor alignment of nucleotide data and misscoring of gels or chromatograms because of sequencing artifacts or human error. The extreme congruence among the chloroplast data sets indicates that if such errors were made, their impact on phyloge-
 Frequency of change
ndhFa
Restriction rbcLa site
 None
1 53 61 100
2 21 24 40
3 10 13 22
4047 5415
a DNA characters with > 1 change are not necessarily homoplastic because they have four possible states.
data is a more-complicated issue that will be addressed elsewhere.
Phylogenies inferred from molecules and morphology were more similar to each other than would be expected by chance, but there were also very substantial differences in the topology of the trees estimated from these different sources of evidence. Nonetheless, the few strongly supported branches on the morphology trees are consistent with clades inferred by the molecular data. No branches on the morphology trees that con􏰮ict with the molecular trees can be unambiguously ascribed to con􏰮icting phylogenetic signals between molecules and morphology. Most of the remaining branches on the morphology-based tree are one or a few steps long (Fig. 3a) and consequently (Felsenstein, 1985) have very weak support from bootstrap analysis (Fig. 5b). There is well-supported phylogenetic signal in the morphological data, but it 􏰮oats in a sea of noise. We should not be surprised, then, that the morphological data behave similarly to random data in tests of congruence with the molecular data. The low ratio of signal to noise in the morphological data set also means that using different weighting schemes to improve the congruence of the chloroplast and morphological data has little merit.
Source of Noise in the Morphological Data and its Consequences for Phylogenetic Inference
The low consistency indices for the morphological data (Table 2) indicate a high level of homoplasy in these characters. Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986) suggested that this homoplasy might be partly a function
403
1,240 182
 Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 563
 netic analysis is extremely small. Other potential sources of noise in the morphological data include misscoring of characters (several errors in these are corrected in the Appendixes), large phenotypic variances in quantitative and qualitative character-state classes (Stevens, 1991), and a weak genetic basis to individual characters. Avoiding these sources of error is commonly left to the common sense and intuition of investigators. Regardless of its exact source, the impact of noise in the morphological data on phylogenetic estimation in Pontederiaceae is negligible, because this data set is almost completely overwhelmed by the chloroplast evidence when the two sets are combined, and this combination has little effect on chloroplast tree resolution or support. However, our study demonstrates that care should be taken in interpreting 􏰭ndings of signi􏰭cant incongruence among data sets, such as that found between molecules and morphology here. Our 􏰭nding of incongruence between the robust chloroplast data and the random data sets demonstrates that the “heterogeneity” or incongruence detected by the ILD test of Farris et al. (1994) can result from a high amount of noise in one of the data sets, rather than a truly con􏰮icting phylogenetic signal.
Very noisy data sets can also result in signi􏰭cant incongruence if their shortest trees are tested against a tree structure that is robustly supported by the chloroplast data (Table 5, 6). However, in such cases we are in effect comparing trees from different data sets that are both poorly supported by the noisy data and 􏰭nd ourselves in the “absurd position of proving that one bad tree issigni􏰭cantlyworsethananother”(Felsenstein, 1988:540). The apparent “badness” of the robust chloroplast trees is entirely from the perspective of the noisy data: Even completely random data have their preferred, if poorly supported, trees. In contrast, despite the lack of robustness of the morphological data from Pontederiaceae, the strong phylogenetic signal evident in the chloroplast data does not con􏰮ict with the few clades that are well supported by morphology (Table 5).
Cunningham (1997) suggested that Templeton’s test and related tests are too con-
servative. More speci􏰭cally, Lutzoni and Vilgalys (1995) suggested that these tests cannot address whether observed differences between trees inferred from different data sets are due to sampling error. These criticisms are valid if a tree from a test data set is compared with most-parsimonious trees from an unrobust rival data set. Such comparisons can misleadingly indicate incongruence between them, because they assess all branches on the rival tree, including those that may re􏰮ect sampling error (or other types of noise) instead of phylogenetic history. A better test is to assess a data set and its trees only against structure that is robustly supported by the rival data set (Mason-Gamer and Kellogg, 1996). Our study illustrates the critical importance of considering the level of support by each data set for its own trees before interpreting tests of congruence among data sets. Because sampling error and other sources of noise can lead to ambiguous and distorted phylogenetic inference on poorly supported branches, these branches should be excluded from consideration in tests of character congruence that consider tree shape.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dick Olmstead, David Baum, and two anonymous reviewers for valuable suggestions on improving the manuscript; Bill Cole for maintaining greenhouse specimens; Majid Ghassemian for technical assistance; Charles Horn and Jennifer Richards for help in revising the morphological data set; David Swofford for access to prerelease copies of PAUP* ; and Gerard Zurawski and the DNAX Research Institute for providing rbcL sequencing primers. The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Province of Ontario provided 􏰭nancial support intheformofresearchgrantstoS.C.H.B.andpostgraduate fellowships to S.W.G.
REFERENCES
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

566
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 47
 APPENDIX 1
Comments on the Morphological Characters
7. Leaf whorls (“Axillary dwarf shoots”).—All but the 􏰭rst of the members of each leaf whorl in H. gardneri may arise from one or more short shoots with annular insertion on the long shoot (Goebel, 1913; Rutishauser, 1983) or alternatively, they may be intercalary leaves produced from a meristematic ring below the shoot apex (Rutishauser, 1983). By either interpretation, the leaf whorls of this species are a unique feature of this taxon, and the coding employed in Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986) is retained.
8. Stipules.—In Pontederiaceae, the structures variously described as stipules or ligules are outgrowths of the lower leaf zone above the insertion of the upper leaf zone (Richards, 1980). Confusion over whether to call these structures stipules or ligules appears to have arisen from an historical precedent set by de Candolle that monocotyledons do not have stipules (Richards, 1980). As de􏰭ned by Richards, “stipule” includes the “ligule” of grasses, the tonguelike outgrowths between sheath and blade. Although less elaborate, such ligules are developmentally homologous with the stipule in Pontederiaceae and are therefore coded identically (state 0). Heteranthera dubia and H. seubertiana possess ligule-like structures, and the leaf whorl members of Hydrothrix gardneri have stipules (Rutishauser, 1983).
9. Petiole.—Character state 2 is a new state that indicates petiole absence.
11–15.Leaf-bladecharacters.—Theserefertotheblades of adult, petiolate leaves, where these are produced, or to the blades of adult, sessile leaves, where not. The boundary between petiole and lamina is not sharp in Eichhornia sp., but this did not unduly interfere with assignment of leaf-blade character states in this species. The 􏰭liform leaf of Hydrothrix gardneri has no structures that are obviously homologous to a petiole or leaf-blade, and so characters 9 and 11–15 are treated as missing data (?) for this taxon.
12. Maximum length of lamina (“maximum leaf size”).— Characterstates:0=5–10cm;1=>10cm;4=<5cm. These are modi􏰭cations of the ranges given in Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986).
16. In􏰮orescence type.—Character state 2 refers here to a spike or raceme, 3 to a subumbel or umbel, and 4 to a two-􏰮owered pseudanthium.
20. Peduncle pubescence.—Taxa are coded as hairy (state 1) if any part of the in􏰮orescence axis is pubescent. 21. Flower attachment.—The pedicellate coding (state 0) is used here if at least some of the 􏰮owers in the in-
􏰮orescence have pedicels.
22. Flower number.—The 􏰮ower count for Philydrum-
lanuginosum refers to the entire panicle, not each spike. 33. Stamen diversity.—Hydrothrix-gardneri has a single fertile stamen and two staminodes; Philydrumlanuginosum has only a single stamen. This character
is coded as missing (?) for these taxa.
43. Anther dehiscence.—An additional character.
State: 0 = regular; 1 = poricidal.
Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012

1998 GRAHAM ET AL.—PHYLOGENETIC CONGRUENCE IN PONTEDERIACEAE 567
     Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
APPENDIX 2. Morphological data set for Pontederiaceae taken from Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986), with some revisions. Corrected entries are indicated with asterisks. Philydrum lanuginosum (Philydraceae) is the outgroup. Two taxa have been added to the matrix (Eichhornia paradoxa and E. meyeri). An undescribed species of Eichhornia, referred to here as Eichhornia sp., was incorrectly identi􏰭ed as E. paradoxa by Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986). One new character is added (number 43) and one deleted (character 19). The numbering of the remaining characters is retained for consistency. The character state 10 in Eckenwalder and Barrett (1986) is replaced with 4 here.
Taxon
Philydrum lanuginosum Pontederia cordata var. cordata
Pontederia cordata var. lancifolia Pontederiacordatavar. ovalis
010000012*02*1*0000 0100000001411001
00104*14*00111002?*000*10*00000 011*14100210000000000221220
Pontederia rotundifolia Pontederia sagittata Eichhornia azurea Eichhornia crassipes Eichhornia diversifolia Eichhornia heterosperma Eichhorniameyeri Eichhornia paniculata Eichhorniaparadoxa Eichhornia sp. Monochoria cyanea Monochoria hastata Monochoria korsakovii Monochoria vaginalis Heteranthera dubia Heteranthera limosa Heteranthera oblongifolia Heteranthera rotundifolia Heteranthera seubertiana Heteranthera zosterifolia Hydrothrix gardneri
0101000000412102
0100000001412001
0101010000410212
0100100010411112
1101010000441112
0*101010000000212
2100000000401002
2*100000000401000
2100000000110003
21000000002*0*0103*
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 1* 0* 0 0 2 0*100*00000041*2002,3*1100104*0110000010110000001 1*10000000041*1000*0100104*011000001011000001*1 11000000000*1*1002,3*1100204*0110000010110000001
1 234 5678 9 10111213141516
Characters 1718202122232425262728293031323334353637383940414243
0100000001010001 0100000001400001
011*14100210000000000221220 01114100214000000000221220
0 111 0100*2*0 2*0*0 1 0 2 210000000004*110*2 210100000000*111*2 2101000000401112 21000100*2*011*0102 111101000014*0102 2 110 0110*?*0 ?*?*?*?*?*4*
10013041411000101011010010 100131*01410000110010000000 100121*01310000110010000000 10013101310000110010000000 00111141311040110010000000 10012*1*41410000111*010000000 100121*412*110002?*00100*00000
011*11100210000000000221320 011*14100210000000000221120 011*1011031000100000000*0010 011*11110210000000000000000 111*12101310000000000000000 111*1210131000000000000*0010 00101140410000000000000000 00114100210000000000000000 10002101310000000000000000 1000*2101410000000000000000 0100*204*011000000001000000*1
