   A Test of the “Flexible Stem” Model of Evolution: Ancestral Plasticity, Genetic Accommodation, and Morphological Divergence in the Threespine Stickleback Radiation. Author(s): Matthew A. Wund, John A. Baker, Brendan Clancy, Justin L. Golub, and Susan A. Foster
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The American Naturalist, Vol. 172, No. 4 (October 2008), pp. 449-462 Published by: The University of Chicago Press for The American Society of Naturalists Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/590966 .
Accessed: 11/06/2012 16:26
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
        http://www.jstor.org
The University of Chicago Press and The American Society of Naturalists are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Naturalist.

vol. 172, no. 4 the american naturalist october 2008   􏺣
 A Test of the “Flexible Stem” Model of Evolution: Ancestral Plasticity, Genetic Accommodation, and Morphological Divergence in the Threespine Stickleback Radiation
Matthew A. Wund,* John A. Baker,† Brendan Clancy,‡ Justin L. Golub,§ and Susan A. Fosterk
Department of Biology, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610
Submitted November 7, 2007; Accepted May 9, 2008; Electronically published August 25, 2008
Online enhancement: appendix.
 Keywords: plasticity, adaptive radiation, flexible stem model, Baldwin effect.
 Since adaptive radiations are characterized as diversification from a common ancestral stem, it follows that the nature of the ancestral stem may importantly influence the nature of a radiation. (West-Eberhard 2003, p. 565)
Phenotypic plasticity is likely to have profound macroevolutionary consequences, yet few attempts have been made to empirically address the processes by which plasticity might influence phenotypic evolution (Pigliucci 2001, 2005; West-Eberhard 2003). Both theoretical and empirical evidence amassed over the past 3 decades has clearly demonstrated that plasticity of virtually any type of trait can respond to selection; thus, it is now beyond doubt that plasticity can evolve (reviewed in Scheiner 1993; Schlichting and Pigliucci 1998; Pigliucci 2001, 2005). While selection may shape the form and expression of phenotypic plasticity (i.e., reaction norm evolution), it may also be possible for the pattern of plasticity in an ancestral population to direct the course of subsequent adaptive evolution (reviewed in West-Eberhard 2003). This hypothesis has been considered in one form or another for at least a century (e.g., Baldwin 1902; Simpson 1953; Mayr 1958; Robinson and Dukas 1999; Pigliucci and Murren 2003; Price et al. 2003; West-Eberhard 2003; Schlichting 2004; Badyaev 2005; Parsons and Robinson 2006; Pigliucci et al. 2006), yet it has only recently begun to receive empirical attention. In 1902, Baldwin most clearly described what has come to be known as the Baldwin effect: developmentally plastic traits (Baldwin’s “ontogenetic accommodations”) can permit a species to cope with environmental pressures until natural selection further improves a species’ fit to its environment. Furthermore, “it results that there arise by survival certain lines of determinate phylogenetic change in the direction of the deter-
abstract: If an ancestral stem group repeatedly colonizes similar environments, developmental plasticity specific to that group should consistently give rise to similar phenotypes. Parallel selection on those similar phenotypes could lead to the repeated evolution of characteristic ecotypes, a property common to many adaptive radiations. A key prediction of this “flexible stem” model of adaptive radiation is that patterns of phenotypic divergence in derived groups should mirror patterns of developmental plasticity in their common ancestor. The threespine stickleback radiation provides an excellent opportunity to test this prediction because the marine form is representative of the ancestral stem group, which has repeatedly given rise to several characteristic ecotypes. We examined plasticity of several aspects of shape and trophic morphology in response to diets characteristic of either the derived benthic ecotype or the limnetic ecotype. When marine fish were reared on alternative diets, plasticity of head and mouth shape paralleled phenotypic divergence between the derived ecotypes, supporting the flexible stem model. Benthic and limnetic fish exhibited patterns of plasticity similar to those of the marine population; however, some differences in population means were present, as well as subtle differences in shape plasticity in the benthic population, indicating a role for genetic accommodation in this system.
    * Corresponding author; e-mail: mwund@clarku.edu.
 † E-mail: jbaker@clarku.edu.
‡ E-mail: bclancy@clarku.edu. § E-mail: jgolub@clarku.edu. k E-mail: sfoster@clarku.edu.
Am. Nat. 2008. Vol. 172, pp. 449–462. 􏱞 2008 by The University of Chicago. 0003-0147/2008/17204-50039$15.00. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1086/590966
 
 450 The American Naturalist
 minate ontogenetic accommodations of earlier generations” (Baldwin 1902, p. 98).
Framing his argument in contemporary terms, because developmental plasticity channels individuals into a particular region of the adaptive landscape, selection should shape derived phenotypes along the trajectory established by ancestral developmental plasticity. Waddington’s genetic assimilation (Waddington 1942, 1952, 1953; Pigliucci and Murren 2003; Pigliucci et al. 2006) is a related but distinct phenomenon in that plasticity in an ancestral population affects the outcome of selection but with the specific result of a loss of ancestral plasticity over a given range of environmental conditions (Crispo 2007). WestEberhard (2003) has proposed the term “genetic accommodation” to encompass the Baldwin effect, genetic assimilation, and phenomena related to reaction norm evolution. Given a newly expressed phenotype (the result of either mutation or induction by a novel environment), selection may improve the form of the trait as well as the regulation of its expression across environments.
Under this model of evolution, ancestral plasticity may play an important role in generating the replicate nature of many adaptive radiations. The ecological theory of adaptive radiation explains replicate radiations as a consequence of parallel selection on independently derived populations, thus leading to strong phenotype-environment correlations among those descendant populations (reviewed in Schluter 2000). However, adding genetic accommodation to this process may go further in explaining why independent derivatives repeatedly evolve the same solutions to the same problems. Repeated selection on, and subsequent genetic accommodation of, an ancestral pattern of developmental plasticity may lead to the evolution of recurrent phenotypes in recurrent environments (West-Eberhard 2003). West-Eberhard (2003) has termed such radiations “flexible stem” systems, in which the developmental plasticity of an ancestral stem group repeatedly generates independently derived populations belonging to a specific set of ecotypes.
Our purpose was to test one of the main predictions of the flexible stem model in a textbook example of a replicate radiation: that of the threespine stickleback fish (Gasterosteus aculeatus). At least two features of this radiation make it especially suitable for testing predictions regarding the evolutionary mechanisms that produce replicate radiations. First, the ancestral population is extant, demonstrating the evolutionary starting point of any stickleback trait, including ancestral plasticity (Bell 1994; Bell and Foster 1994). Paleontological, morphological, and population genetic data all suggest that oceanic stickleback, which exhibit both fully marine and anadromous lifehistory strategies, have changed little since giving rise to numerous freshwater populations following the last glacial
 maximum (Bell and Legendre 1987; Bell 1994; Bell and Foster 1994; Bell and Andrews 1997). Second, the freshwater derivatives have repeatedly and independently diverged into several characteristic ecotypes depending on the environment in which they evolved (Taylor and McPhail 2000). If the flexible stem model is correct, ancestral plasticity in response to these different environments should produce phenotypes resembling the divergent freshwater ecotypes.
We focus on the well-known benthic and limnetic ecotypes, which have evolved repeatedly in shallow, relatively eutrophic lakes and deep, relatively oligotrophic lakes, respectively. Limnetic ecotypes feed primarily on zooplankton in open water habitats throughout their lives (Wootton 1994; Andrews 1999), a feeding mode that favors several morphological adaptations, including relatively large eyes; a long slender head and mouth; a long, slim body; and many long gill rakers (Walker 1997). Benthic ecotypes are deeper bodied, living in a spatially complex environment and feeding on larger aquatic invertebrates (Wootton 1994). This feeding mode favors features opposite of those of limnetics: a deep head and body; a short, wide mouth; and few small gill rakers. The food habits of anadromous fish are very poorly known. Our unpublished evidence from fish on the breeding grounds suggests that they feed on a variety of foods ranging from plankton to large invertebrates; presumably, they feed more heavily on plankton outside the breeding season, when they may range far out at sea. Thus, compared with the two lake populations, anadromous fish can probably be classified as generalist feeders. Fry and smaller juveniles (fish ∼5–15 mm total length) of all three ecotypes feed primarily on plankton. Benthic and anadromous fish begin eating larger benthic foods at about 15 mm total length and eventually assume the adult diet (Andrews 1999), while limnetic fish feed on plankton throughout their lives.
The primary objective of our study is to explore whether and to what degree threespine stickleback from one population of each of these three morphologically distinct ecotypes exhibit plasticity of trophic features when forced to feed on alternative food types. We predict that the pattern of diet-induced plasticity in the ancestral population will mirror the pattern of phenotypic divergence between the two derived ecotypes. The flexible stem model posits that genetic accommodation, the evolutionary refinement of the form and expression of reaction norms, should follow the initial “rescue effect” of ancestral plasticity. While the model does not predict a general pattern or direction of genetic accommodation, we expect freshwater reaction norms to be shifted toward more extreme phenotypes than can be induced via plasticity in the marine population. Because limnetic fish feed primarily on plankton in open water habitats throughout their lives, this ecotype may be
 
 Plasticity and Adaptive Radiation 451
 the more likely to exhibit genetic assimilation (i.e., a loss of plasticity), should it occur.
Previous studies have demonstrated that forcing fish of one freshwater ecotype to feed on the preferred food of the opposite ecotype reduces their fitness, as indicated by reduced growth rate and/or feeding efficiency (Robinson 2000). Other studies have demonstrated that fish possessing a hybrid (intermediate) phenotype do less well than the pure ecotypes in the two types of feeding environments (Schluter 1993; Hatfield and Schluter 1999). Thus, it is clearly valuable to possess a phenotype that is appropriate for the foods present in the environment; as a result, populations may possess substantial ontogenetic plasticity in order to achieve high fitness if their habitat varies in food type availability. Day et al. (1994) and Day and McPhail (1996) examined diet-induced plasticity of trophic morphology in two sympatric species of freshwater stickleback and found that both benthic and limnetic ecotypes showed some degree of morphological plasticity. Because morphological changes were associated with improved foraging efficiency on respective diets, they inferred that dietinduced plasticity is adaptive (Day and McPhail 1996). Our study complements this work by considering the ancestral population, thus allowing us to directly test hypotheses about the evolutionary trajectory of plasticity. In addition, we consider isolated allopatric freshwater populations, a situation more characteristic of the radiation as a whole than the species pairs considered by Day et al. (1994) and Day and McPhail (1996).
Methods
All individuals used in this experiment were first-generation laboratory-reared fish. Their parents were collected in June 2005 by J. A. Baker and S. A. Foster in three locations in southeastern Alaska: Resurrection Bay (marine population), Willow Lake (benthic population), and Lynne Lake (limnetic population). From each of these populations, 16 full-sib families were generated by extruding eggs from gravid females and fertilizing them with sperm taken from the macerated testes of males. All parents were killed with an overdose of tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222), a fish anesthetic, and preserved. Fertilized embryos were maintained in Alaska for 3–5 days, sterilized with a 1% iodine solution, and shipped overnight to our lab at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, where they were subsequently cared for until hatching.
Newly hatched fry were kept in a dechlorinated 6% solution of Instant Ocean sea salt in petri dishes. Once their yolk sacs were fully absorbed, fry from all three populations were fed brine shrimp nauplii (Artemia sp.). Once they became large enough (∼1 cm total length) to ingest small bloodworms (Diptera: Chironomidae), the fish were
 divided into experimental treatments, and the experiment began. Four fish from each family were used in the experiment.
For the duration of the experiment, two siblings from each family were fed a diet of bloodworms, and two additional siblings were fed a diet of brine shrimp (fig. 1). Chironomid larvae and zooplankton are typical of the benthic and limnetic stickleback diets, respectively (Wootton 1994). Both standard and platinum brine shrimp (Argent Chemical, Redmond, WA) were used to improve the nutritional quality of the planktonic diet treatment. Benthic treatment fry were fed bloodworms sorted to an appropriate size so that handling time per food item was always long. Fish were kept individually in pint jars filled with a dechlorinated 3% solution of Instant Ocean sea salt. Jars were kept on a countertop in a room with natural lighting entering from nearby windows. They were arranged haphazardly, and while fish were isolated physically, they remained in visual contact with those in neighboring jars. Fish were fed to satiation twice daily, and excess food was removed each morning before feeding. Water was completely changed in all jars on a weekly basis. In order to minimize differences in shape due to ontogenetic effects, the experiment was terminated on a case by case basis as each fish reached a common ontogenetic stage (Walker 1997), here a total length of 2.5 cm. By this size, differences in morphology between benthics and limnetics should have been apparent in the absence of any plasticity (Cresko and Baker 1996). Fish were killed in a solution of MS222, stained with alizarin red S, and then preserved in a 10% formaldehyde solution for analysis. Specimens were digitally photographed along with a set of calipers set at 10 mm to illustrate scale.
Of the 192 fish that began the experiment, 116 survived to reach the requisite length. Premature mortality was higher in the limnetic diet treatment, irrespective of population (51 out of 96 fish), indicating that this diet was of poorer quality than the benthic diet (29 out of 96 fish died prematurely). The implications of this treatment-
Figure 1: Experimental design.
  
 452 The American Naturalist
 specific mortality bias are addressed in the “Discussion.” Thirty-one fish that died prematurely reached a length of at least 1.5 cm, and statistical analyses were performed with and without these individuals. The results did not change qualitatively, so these fish were included in the final analyses to maintain balance among treatments (22–27 fish in all treatment combinations), yielding a data set with 147 fish. Only four out of 48 families, all of which were from the marine population, lost both individuals of a given population # diet treatment, and no family lost all individuals from both treatments. Statistical analyses were performed on a subset of data in which each family with two remaining fish was randomly reduced to a single fish for each diet treatment. Because the results of these analyses did not differ qualitatively from those of the full data set, all analyses presented here were performed on the latter (i.e., 147 fish, 48 families).
Geometric morphometrics (reviewed in Zelditch et al. 2004) was used to characterize shape variation among subjects. Walker’s landmark coordinates (Walker 1997; Walker and Bell 2000) were used as a framework to capture overall body shape variation, but this scheme was modified to more specifically consider trophic morphology (fig. 2). Landmarks were identified on each specimen using TPSdig (ver. 2.10), developed by F. J. Rohlf. The landmarks were all type 1 and 2 of Bookstein’s (1991) classified landmarks with the exception of point 3 (Zelditch et al. 2004). To determine the location of this landmark, a straight line was created between landmarks 1 (the tip of the snout) and 2 (the center of the eye). Landmark 3 was established by placing it on the point of intersection between this line and the edge of the eye. Thus, landmark 3 helped establish eye size as well as the position of the eye relative to the snout. Although we limit our morphometrics analysis to external trophic characters, there exists substantial eco-
 typic variation in external features; thus, we expect that our analysis is sufficient to capture functionally and ecologically relevant characteristics. In addition to these external features, we also examined variation in the gill rakers, an important internal trophic character.
Generalized procrustes analysis superimposition was used to obtain shape variables that are independent of size, rotation, and translation (Rohlf 1990; Walker 1997; Zelditch et al. 2004). A consensus configuration of all specimens, group centroid sizes (a measure of size independent of shape), as well as principal and partial warps from a thin plate spline bending energy matrix was generated using IMP geometric morphometric software developed by H. D. Sheets (http://www.canisius.edu/∼sheets/morphsoft.html). The thin plate spline was used to generate deformation grids that allow the visual interpretation of shape variation. A set of shape variables (partial warps) is produced that can be analyzed with conventional multivariate statistical analysis (Zelditch et al. 2004). Twenty-six partial warps and two uniform components (components that describe shape differences in terms of linear transformations) were generated.
Following preservation, fish often bend dorsoventrally, thus introducing nonbiological variation into landmark data. To remove the effects of this artifact, we initially performed a principal components analysis on partial warp scores generated from all 16 landmarks, using TPS Relative Warps (ver. 1.44). The first principal component (PC1) explained 45.5% of the variation in shape and clearly described alterations that resulted from fish bending following death and preservation (fig. A1 in the online edition of the American Naturalist). When the TPS “unbend specimens” algorithm (TPS Util, ver. 1.38) was applied to correct for this artifactual variation, the new PC1 explained variation in shape nearly identical to that of PC2 in the original analysis, supporting the claim that PC1 captures
   Figure 2: The 16 digital landmarks used to describe fish shape in left lateral view: (1) anterior tip of upper lip; (2) center of eye; (3) eye radius as defined by line created by points 1 and 2; (4) supraoccipital notch lateral to dorsal midline; (5) farthest posterior point in skull; (6) junction of head to body on ventral midline; (7) posterior edge of angular; (8) posterior end of mouth; (9) anterior junction of first dorsal spine; (10) base of dorsal fin ray; (11–13) caudal peduncle; (14) base of first anal fin ray; (15) junction of pelvic spine on pelvic girdle; (16) upper edge of junction of pectoral fin to body.
 
 Plasticity and Adaptive Radiation 453
 most or all of the preservational artifact. To remove the variation associated with bending, we regressed all superimposed landmark coordinates on PC1 from the original analysis using IMP Standard 6 and used the residuals of this analysis to generate corrected partial warp scores, which we used in subsequent analyses of total body shape.
MANOVA (Sokal and Rohlf 1995) was performed on partial warp scores to determine whether total body shape varied across diets for each population. IMP VecCompare6 was used to calculate the angle between significant multivariate reaction norm vectors that described the relationship between shape and diet for each population. If two populations exhibit similar changes in shape across diet treatments, then the angle between their multivariate regression equations should be 0. To assess whether these angles differed significantly from 0, a bootstrapping procedure was used to generate a distribution of angles within each population based on the residual variation in shape not explained by diet. If the angles generated within populations are greater than the observed angle between populations, then the between-population angle is deemed not significantly different from 0, and the two populations can be said to have similar plasticity of shape (Zelditch et al. 2004). Distributions of angles between within-group vectors were generated with 400 bootstrap iterations.
MANOVAs were also performed on pooled data to determine whether shape varied among populations, between diets, among families, and as a consequence of a population # diet interaction. All tests of variation among populations used the mean square for family within population as the denominator for the F ratio. In order to focus on shape variation in the head, identical analyses were performed on landmarks 1–8 only. Finally, an ANOVA was performed on population centroid sizes (Bookstein 1991) to determine how population and diet affected size independent of shape.
In addition to considering variation in overall shape and size, we examined the effects of population and diet on four specific sets of linear measurements that are known to differ among benthic and limnetic ecotypes: mouth length, snout length, eye radius, and gill raker length. The three external measurements were calculated as distances between digitized landmarks (mouth length: landmarks 1 and 8; snout length: landmarks 1 and 3; eye radius: landmarks 2 and 3). Typically, limnetic fish have relatively larger eyes, longer snouts, shorter mouths, and longer gill rakers than benthic fish when body size is taken into account. Gill rakers are structures that run along the anterior side of all gill arches of teleost fish. They capture food particles in the buccal cavity before they can be lost through the gills. Long gill rakers perform best with small particles, and short gill rakers are useful for larger food particles. Thus, we measured the length of gill rakers to
 determine whether they exhibit diet-induced plasticity. We dissected out the first gill arch on the right side of all fish and placed them in glycerine on a microscope slide. We were able to perform successful dissections on 142 out of 147 fish. Using a dissecting scope equipped with a micrometer, we measured the second, third, and fourth rakers on the descending (long) branch of the first arch; these are typically the longest gill rakers. Lengths of these three rakers were then averaged for each fish. Nested ANCOVAs were used to determine whether population, family within population, diet, or a population # diet interaction could explain variation in average gill raker length, snout length, and/or eye radius, with head centroid size as a covariate for all linear measurements. Nearly all partial warps and linear measurements were normally distributed within populations; thus, analyses were performed on nontransformed data (Shapiro-Wilks’s tests: nearly all P 1 .05; data not shown).
Results
Total Body Morphology
Total body shape (i.e., all landmarks included) differed among populations, among families within populations, and between diets but not as a result of a population # diet interaction (table 1). Differences in shape between diets are subtle, but benthic diets were associated with separation of the base of the pelvic spine (landmark 15) and the base of the anal fin ray (landmark 14) and a separation between the base of the first dorsal spine (landmark 9) and the supraoccipital notch at the top of the head (landmark 4; fig. 3A). The opposite pattern was observed in fish reared on the limnetic diet. Differences in head morphology were also present and are analyzed in detail below. When considered separately, only the benthic
Table 1: Multivariate ANOVAs of total body shape (all 16 landmarks)
     Population and
model effect Wilks’s l df F P
     All populations: Population
Diet Family(population) Population # diet
Marine: Diet
Limnetic: Diet Benthic: Diet
.0080 .3100 .0000 .4684
.2560 .3442 .1670
56, 42
28, 69 1,260, 1,846
56, 138 28, 15 28, 22 28, 23
7.616 5.490 1.159 1.137
1.558 1.497 4.096
!.001*** !.001*** .002**
.272 .185 .167
!.001***
     ** .01≥P1.001. *** .001 ≥ P.
 
 454 The American Naturalist
  Figure 3: Effect of diet on body shape for all fish (A) and benthic fish (B). Circles indicate the position of landmarks in the consensus configuration for all fish (A) and the benthic population (B). Vectors emanate from consensus landmarks toward their average position in the benthic (left) or limnetic (right) diet treatments. The deformation grids were produced by Regress6k, and displacements from the consensus are exaggerated #4 to highlight shape differences. Using the displaced landmarks as a guide, a hand-drawn image of a stickleback was superimposed on each deformation to aid biological interpretation.
 population showed significant diet-induced plasticity in total body morphology (table 1), with shape differences similar to those found for fish overall (fig. 3B).
Centroid size, which is the geometric morphometric measure of size independent of shape, varied between diets: fish fed a limnetic diet were smaller than those fed a benthic diet, regardless of their population (ANOVA: F p 23.000, df p 1, 96, P ! .001; fig. 4). While populations did not differ in centroid size (ANOVA: F p 2.012, df p 2, 45, P p .146; fig. 4), families nested within populations did (ANOVA: F p 1.58, df p 45, 96, P p .032).
Head Morphology
We predicted that most diet-induced morphological differences would be seen in the head, so geometric morphometrics analysis was performed on landmarks 1–8 alone. Head shape differed among populations and between diets but not among families, nor was it due to a population # diet interaction (table 2). Multivariate regression vectors predicting shape as a function of diet (i.e., multivariate reaction norms) were statistically similar in all populations, although limnetic and marine populations were more similar to each other than either was to the benthic population, as is indicated by the large angle between the benthic regression vector and those of the other populations (marine-limnetic: 18.2􏱟; marine-benthic: 46.1􏱟; limnetic-benthic: 49.6􏱟; table A1 in the online edition of the American Naturalist). A lack of statistical power can explain the failure to reject the null hypotheses of
 angles of 0􏱟. As predicted, all populations exhibited larger mouths (the distance between landmarks 1 and 8) and shorter snouts (the distance between landmarks 1 and 3) when reared on a benthic diet and smaller mouths and longer snouts when reared on a limnetic diet (fig. 5). Fish fed a limnetic diet had shallower heads than those fed benthic diets.
Surprisingly, eye size increases (the distance between landmarks 2 and 3) in fish fed a benthic diet, which is contrary to our prediction. The difference in shape plasticity between the benthic population and the marine and limnetic populations arises mainly from differences in plasticity of the position of the posterior, ventral portion of the head (landmark 6) as well as in the position of the eye. In the benthic diet treatment, marine and limnetic fish undergo an anterior shift in landmark 6 (fig. 5A, 5B), whereas the benthic population does not (fig. 5C). The eyes of benthic fish reared on a benthic diet also shift upward relative to the other landmarks (landmarks 2, 3; fig. 5C). Considering these differences together, benthic fish reared on a benthic diet tend to experience a deepening of the head relative to the other populations.
To more explicitly assess the relationship between ancestral plasticity and freshwater divergence, we compared shape differences due to plasticity in marine fish with shape differences across freshwater populations reared in their natural diet treatment (i.e., benthic fish on a benthic diet and limnetic fish on a limnetic diet). Comparison of figure 5A and 5D clearly shows that plasticity in the marine population generates phenotypes resembling freshwater populations
 
 Plasticity and Adaptive Radiation 455
 reared on their respective native diet treatments. Comparison of multivariate regression vectors confirms this result, although statistical power to reject the null hypothesis appears to be low (angle between marine vector and benthic/ limnetic vector p 29.7􏱟, not significant). Nevertheless, marine fish clearly show patterns of plasticity closely resembling patterns of freshwater ecotypic variation.
We predicted that mouth, snout, and eye size would differ among populations and between diets, and an ANCOVA was performed on the relative lengths of the snout and mouth and on the eye radius, with head centroid size as a covariate to correct for overall size differences. All three traits exhibited significant plasticity, although surprisingly, eye size was larger in the benthic treatment than in the limnetic treatment, whereas the other two traits varied predictably across diets (table 3; fig. 6). Fish reared on the limnetic diet had shorter mouths and longer snouts than fish reared on the benthic diet. Marine fish show considerably less plasticity in mouth length than the freshwater populations (fig. 6A), and limnetic fish show less plasticity in snout length (fig. 6B), although neither population # diet interaction was significant (table 3). There was a significant population effect for eye radius, with the benthic population having smaller eyes than the other populations, which is expected on the basis of natural ecotypic variation (fig. 6C). Overall, variation in linear measurements corresponds with variation in these traits observed in overall head shape (cf. fig. 6 with landmark displacements in fig. 5).
Contrary to our predictions, gill raker length was longer on benthic diets than on limnetic diets, and limnetic fish had shorter gill rakers than both the benthic and marine fish (table 3; fig. 7). All three populations showed similar
Table 2: Multivariate ANOVAs of head shape (landmarks 1–8)
     Population and
model effect Wilks’s l df F P
     All populations: Population
Diet Family(population) Population # diet
Marine: Diet
Limnetic: Diet Benthic: Diet
.0849 .4697 .0061 .6600
.4518 .4961 .3464
24, 74
12, 85 540, 1,031
24, 170 12, 31 12, 38 12, 39
7.501 7.996 1.052 1.636
3.134 3.216 6.132
!.001*** !.001***
.245 .039*
.005**
.003** !.001***
     * .05≥P1.01. ** .01≥P1.001. *** .001 ≥ P.
relationships between head size and gill raker length, so differences in allometry among populations cannot explain this surprising result (fig. A2 in the online edition of the American Naturalist).
Discussion
The postglacial radiation of the threespine stickleback fish is distinguished by a remarkable level of parallelism in which characteristic ecotypes have repeatedly and independently evolved from the marine population (reviewed in Bell and Foster 1994). In order to explain such replicate radiations, West-Eberhard (2003) has proposed the “flexible stem” model of adaptive evolution, whereby the evolution of derived ecotypes is contingent on the form of developmental
  Figure 4: Reaction norm graphs of the effect of diet on centroid size for all three populations. Lower values represent smaller fish, and higher values represent larger fish. Bars are means 􏱠 95% confidence intervals.
  
 456 The American Naturalist
  Figure 5: Effect of diet on head shape for marine fish (A), limnetic fish (B), and benthic fish (C). D depicts shape differences between benthic fish reared on a benthic diet and limnetic fish reared on a limnetic diet. Circles represent the position of landmarks in the consensus configuration for each population (or the consensus between benthic and limnetic fish reared on their native diets in D). Vectors emanate from consensus landmarks toward their average position in the benthic (left) or limnetic (right) diet treatments. The deformation grids were produced by Regress6k, and displacements from the consensus are exaggerated #4 to highlight shape differences. Using the displaced landmarks as a guide, a hand-drawn image of a stickleback was superimposed on each deformation to aid biological interpretation.
 plasticity expressed by the ancestor in response to novel conditions. This model is founded on a long-standing hypothesis regarding the role of plasticity in constraining subsequent adaptive evolution (Baldwin 1896, 1902; Simpson 1953; Mayr 1958; Robinson and Dukas 1999; Price et al. 2003; West-Eberhard 2003). Our aim was to test a key prediction of the flexible stem model and, more generally, of the Baldwin effect: if phenotypic plasticity of an ancestral population channels descendents into specific adaptive outcomes, then ancestral plasticity should produce phenotypes that resemble ecotypic variation among derived populations (West-Eberhard 2003). Our results broadly support this
 model of evolution. The ancestral population exhibited dietinduced plasticity in several aspects of head morphology, and the phenotypes produced were qualitatively similar to those considered adaptive in each of the derived populations. Mouth length and snout length in particular showed substantial plasticity across populations, consistent with differences among benthic and limnetic ecotypes. We also found some evidence of genetic accommodation in our system. The means of several traits differed among populations (indicated by significant population effects in MANOVAs and ANOVAs), and the form of head shape plasticity appeared to differ somewhat in the benthic population relative
 
 Plasticity and Adaptive Radiation 457
 Table 3: ANCOVAs of linear measurements
     Trait and
model effect df SS MS F P
     Mouth length: Population
Diet
Population # diet Family(population) Head size
Snout length: Population
Diet
Population # diet Family(population) Head size
Eye radius: Population
Diet
Population # diet Family(population) Head size
Gill raker length: Population
Diet
Population # diet Family(population) Head size
2, 45 1, 95 2, 95
45, 95 1, 95
2, 45 1, 95 2, 95
45, 95 1, 95
2, 45 1, 95 2, 95
45, 95 1, 95
2, 45 1, 90 2, 90
45, 90 1, 90
.0000 .0000 .0064 .0064 .0015 .0007 .0210 .0005 .0154 .0154
.0008 .0004 .0023 .0023 .0006 .0003 .0135 .0003 .0183 .0183
.0009 .0004 .0013 .0013 .0002 .0001 .0051 .0001 .0121 .0121
.0905 .0453 .0194 .0194 .0023 .0012 .3484 .0077 .1723 .1723
.100 18.478 2.135 1.338 44.286
1.321 8.138 1.050 1.066
64.842
3.831 17.973 1.112 1.584 170.667
5.848 4.903 .293 1.957 43.548
.905 !.001***
.124
.119 !.001***
.277 .005** .354 .389
!.001*** .029*
!.001*** .333
.031* !.001***
.006** .029* .747 .004**
!.001***
     * .05≥P1.01. ** .01≥P1.001. *** .001 ≥ P.
to the marine and limnetic populations. We found little to no evidence for genetic assimilation, however, which we predicted to occur in the limnetic population because of their lifelong planktonic diet. Despite typically surviving on a diet of plankton throughout their lives, fish from the limnetic populations we examined displayed substantial diet-induced plasticity in most traits examined. Plasticity in the limnetic fish either could be an ancestral relic or may be maintained by some unmeasured aspect of environmental variation. Marine and benthic stickleback diets vary over ontogeny and across seasons, which could favor the evolution and maintenance of plasticity rather than invariant morphologies specialized for particular prey (i.e., prey type varies in a fine-grained manner; Levins 1968).
Given that our diet treatments captured only one aspect of the benthic and limnetic niches, it is not surprising that most of the plasticity we observed occurred in the head. Plasticity in trophic morphology has been found in many taxa, such as fish (Wimberger 1992; Day et al. 1994; Day and McPhail 1996; Wintzer and Motta 2005), mammals (Beecher and Corruccini 1981; Kiliaridis 1986), reptiles (Aubret et al. 2004), and insects (Thompson 1999). Across the three stickleback populations we examined, mouths
 were larger and snouts were shorter when fish were fed benthic diets. The heads of fish fed benthic diets were deeper than those of fish fed limnetic diets, which tended to have shallower heads that tapered anteriorly. These plastic responses are probably adaptive, because larger mouths accommodate larger food and shorter snouts are better adapted for the sucking mechanism used to capture benthic prey (reviewed in Walker 1997).
Whether these patterns of plasticity and reaction norm divergence are general to the stickleback radiation remains to be seen. In their examination of sympatric benthic and limnetic populations, Day et al. (1994) and Day and McPhail (1996) also found that fish fed a benthic diet have deeper heads and, to a lesser extent, larger mouths and shorter snouts than fish fed a limnetic diet. Nevertheless, the stickleback radiation is extensive; thus, we plan to extend our investigations to include more populations of each ecotype to gain a more general understanding of how plasticity evolves in this radiation. Ultimately, the clearest demonstration and understanding of the process of genetic accommodation can come only by identifying the underlying genetic changes responsible for reaction norm evolution. Then, at least three principle questions regarding the flexible stem model and the role of plasticity in evolution in general can be addressed. (1) What types of genetic changes lead to shifts in reaction norms as a founding population adapts to its new environment? (2) Are there auxiliary mutations that alleviate costs associated with the ancestral reaction norm, increasing the fitness associated with an adaptively plastic response? (3) Are common genetic mechanisms responsible for generating parallel patterns of genetic accommodation throughout a replicate radiation? Because reaction norms are evolvable traits unto themselves (reviewed in Schlichting and Pigliucci 1998), recent advances in the strategies used to elucidate the genetic bases for stickleback character evolution (reviewed in Foster and Baker 2004; Kingsley et al. 2004) should be applicable to the evolution of reaction norms for shape, trophic characters, and foraging behavior. Forward genetic approaches such as quantitative trait locus mapping (Colosimo et al. 2004; Cresko et al. 2004), the sequencing of candidate genes (Shapiro et al. 2004; Colosimo et al. 2005), and microarray techniques that identify genetic differences among populations (Miller et al. 2007) have helped determine the genetic basis for stickleback armor evolution, and these methods could prove useful for understanding the genetics of genetic accommodation as well.
Despite general support for our predictions, some unexpected but potentially informative variation was generated in our experiment. The deep bodies of benthic fish are well suited for maneuverability in a complex benthic environment, whereas the more fusiform shape characteristic of limnetic fish is better adapted to swimming up
 
 458 The American Naturalist
 Figure 6: Reaction norm graphs of the effect of diet on mouth length (A), the effect of diet on snout length (B), and the effect of diet on eye radius (C). Linear effects were standardized with respect to head centroid size. Bars are means 􏱠 95% confidence intervals.
 in the water column (Walker 1997). Nevertheless, we found only slight diet-induced differences in body shape in a single population (benthic), and these differences were not related to body depth, as we expected.
Had we specifically included a more complete set of environmental cues that are found in benthic and limnetic environments, we might have observed plasticity in a wider variety of traits such as body depth. For example, requiring stickleback to forage within a complex substrate might induce deeper, more maneuverable bodies, whereas requiring them to search for small planktonic prey up in the water column might induce more fusiform bodies characteristic of the limnetic ecotype. Several environmental variables have been found to elicit plastic changes in fish body shape (e.g., predators: Bronmark and Miner 1992; Bronmark and Pettersson 1994; Holopainen et al. 1997; water velocity: Pakkasmaa and Piironen 2000; Do-
 menici et al. 2008), and habitat structure might do so as well. Along a similar vein, although eye size differed predictably among populations, plasticity generated phenotypes that are inconsistent with natural ecotypic variation. Either eye size plasticity is maladaptive or the conditions of our experiment were not sufficient to induce a plastic response relevant to freshwater fish in nature. The ease with which brine shrimp can be detected in a small jar with clear water may not provide an appropriate cue for developing larger eyes, but searching for small prey in a much larger area might be sufficient to generate adaptive plasticity. Our future research will include efforts to examine plasticity of a wide variety of both behavioral and morphological traits in response to a more complete set of environmental variables.
In addition to a lack of appropriate cues, smaller eyes in the limnetic treatment could be explained by a poorer-
 
 Plasticity and Adaptive Radiation 459
  Figure 7: Reaction norm graph of the effect of diet on gill raker length, standardized with respect to head centroid size. Bars are means 􏱠 95% confidence intervals.
 quality diet than the benthic treatment, which is consistent with the observation that fish reared on brine shrimp were smaller overall than fish reared on bloodworms, regardless of their population. Size plasticity can result from a difference in the type of diet and/or the quality of diet presented to these fish. Although we fed fish to satiation, the nutrient quality might have differed across treatments, a potentially confounding factor in studies that examine diet-induced plasticity (Wimberger 1993; Myers et al. 1996). However, while diet quality could have resulted in differences in eye size and total size, we feel that it is unlikely to have produced patterns of plasticity that correspond so well with predictions about how benthic and limnetic fish should differ in trophic morphology.
As with eye size, gill raker length increased on benthic diets, and surprisingly, limnetic fish had slightly smaller rakers than either of the other populations, contrary to expectations and contrary to the results of Day et al. (1994). Population variation in allometry could explain this result if differences in relative gill raker length appear only when fish reach body sizes larger than our termination threshold. Indeed, in an examination of sympatric benthic and limnetic stickleback ecotypes in Benka Lake, Alaska, Cresko and Baker (1996) found that interecotypic differences in gill raker length and eye size appeared only after fish had reached sizes 1 cm larger than the fish in this study. At sizes below this length, benthic fish even tended to have larger eyes than limnetic fish. Day et al. (1994) concluded their experiment when fish reached an average length of 4 cm, as opposed to the 2.5 cm threshold used in our experiment, suggesting that rearing our fish to a larger size could have provided sufficient time for plasticity in gill raker length to manifest itself. However,
 in a related experiment, Day and McPhail (1996) examined diet-induced plasticity of field-caught fish in which diet treatments were first imposed on fish larger than 2.5 cm. They observed little to no plasticity in most traits, including gill raker length, and argued that most plastic changes probably occur at smaller sizes. Considered collectively, these studies lead us to hypothesize that dietinduced plasticity is most pronounced if initiated early in life, when major structural changes can more easily be accomplished. As fish grow, allometry could play a more prominent role in accentuating differences that arose both via plasticity and as a result of genetic differences among populations. Complex relationships between environmentally induced plasticity, ontogeny, and allometry can be critical to the outcome of phenotypic evolution (Schlichting and Pigliucci 1998), and this issue bears further investigation in our system, particularly with respect to gill raker length and eye size.
Although many aspects of trophic morphology, head shape, and body shape are correlated along the benthiclimnetic environmental gradient, our results lead us to reject the hypothesis that these features are developmentally integrated to a point that a single diet cue is sufficient to generate the phenotypic correlations observed in nature. In natural populations, we suspect that phenotypic correlations between trophic morphology and body shape exist as a consequence of environmental correlations between prey type and habitat structure. Extending this experiment to include more dimensions of the benthic and limnetic niches will allow us to address whether ancestral stickleback exhibit integrated plastic responses among suites of associated traits. Furthermore, measuring performance on alternative diets, in terms of either growth rates or foraging
 
 460 The American Naturalist
 efficiency, will allow us to determine the adaptive value of any plasticity we observe (Day et al. 1994; Day and McPhail 1996).
Following a century of discussion, evidence has begun accumulating in support of the hypothesis that plasticity may play an important role in adaptive radiation. In two experiments similar to the one described here, Day et al. (1994) and Day and McPhail (1996) examined dietinduced plasticity in benthic and limnetic populations inhabiting the same lakes (i.e., stickleback “species pairs”). Plasticity was present in both populations but was more substantial in the benthic fish, presumably because these fish experience an ontogenetic diet shift. Furthermore, performance on particular prey types was enhanced by changes in trophic morphology, demonstrating that plasticity was adaptive (Day et al. 1994; Day and McPhail 1996). Because ancestral plasticity was not considered by these authors, it could not be determined whether plasticity was present before the invasion of freshwater habitats or whether it evolved subsequently; however, their results strongly support the hypothesis that adaptive plasticity can be an important component in adaptive radiations. This study confirms that ancestral plasticity is present and, in most cases, mirrors patterns of phenotypic diversity found among derived populations.
Evidence from other radiations also indicates a potential role for the influence of plasticity on subsequent patterns of divergence. In spadefoot toads, for example, patterns of developmental plasticity within individual species resemble interspecific differences in larval period that are associated with climatic differences experienced among species (Gomez-Mestre and Buchholz 2006). This observation is consistent with the prediction that the ancestral reaction norm influenced the outcome of adaptation to new environments. In addition, interspecific variation in reaction norms exists, indicating that genetic accommodation could have played an important role in the evolution of larval period and correlated morphological features in this group (Gomez-Mestre and Buchholz 2006). In the Caribbean Anolis radiation, there is some evidence that plasticity in limb length within species mirrors ecotypic variation among ecomorphs (Losos et al. 2000; Kolbe and Losos 2005), suggesting the possibility that developmental plasticity plays a role in this system as well. It is an open question as to whether limb length plasticity is ancestral to the group, but this radiation may be another good candidate for testing models of the role of plasticity in adaptive radiation.
The results of this study shed new light on the idea that replicate lineages within a radiation evolve both independently and in parallel. Newly isolated populations share a common starting point determined by their ancestral plasticity, which implies common inherited potentialities and
 constraints that can subsequently direct their evolutionary trajectories in parallel but not really independent ways (West-Eberhard 2003). Recent breakthroughs in the evolution of stickleback development have demonstrated that recurrent selection on standing genetic variation in the marine population could account for the parallel evolution of armor reduction in many freshwater populations (Cresko et al. 2004; Colosimo et al. 2005). However, considering the evolutionary implications of parallel selection only on ancestral genetic variance might fall short of explaining the processes that generate replicate radiations. In contributing their genes to a founding population, an ancestral population provides its entire developmental program, the expression of which is partially contingent on the environment it encounters. The responses of ancestral developmental programs to novel environments should substantially influence the path taken on a population’s new adaptive journey. Understanding the full extent to which phenotypic plasticity has influenced macroevolutionary patterns and the origin of phenotypic novelties in particular may come to represent a major breakthrough in evolutionary biology (Pigliucci 2005).
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank L. Ackein and J. Bausell for assistance in caring for fish during the experiment. W. Aguirre provided valuable guidance in the use of TPS morphometric analytical software. R. King, T. Landberg, C. Schlichting, K. Shaw, L. Wilusz-Brown, and two anonymous reviewers all provided valuable comments on the manuscript. In addition to providing helpful comments on the manuscript, F. J. Rohlf and M. Zelditch were invaluable resources with respect to our understanding of geometric morphometrics analyses. The Alaska Department of Fish and Game provided permits to collect adult fish used to generate the subjects in this study. The University of Alaska Anchorage provided laboratory space to generate stickleback crosses from field-caught fish. Financial support was provided by National Science Foundation grant IOB-0447480 to S.A.F. and J.A.B. and by Clark University research funds. M.A.W. is supported by a National Institutes of Health (NIH) postdoctoral fellowship (grant F32GM080168) from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIGMS or the NIH.
Literature Cited
 