   Syst. Biol. 45(3):278-289, 1996
PHYLOGENIES AND PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES—THE EVOLUTION OF SEXUAL DIMORPHISM IN SOUTHEAST ASIAN FROGS
SHARON B. EMERSON
Department ofBiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA, E-mail: emerson@biobgy.utah.edu; and Division of Amphibians and Reptiles, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois 60605, USA
Abstract.—There are a number of species of Southeast Asian Rana that are characterized by an unusual suite of sexually dimorphic features and derived reproductive modes. These frogs lack the usual secondary sexual characteristics of ranid frogs: nuptial pads, vocal sacs, and enlarged flexor muscles. Secondary sexual characteristics in frogs are under androgenic control. Phylogenetic analyses using morphological and molecular data indicate that a drop in androgen level and/or a shift in androgen sensitivity may have been involved in the evolution of male parental care and the loss of the common suite of secondary sexual characteristics in these Asian frogs. Phylogenetic analyses also provide important information on experimental design by indicating the most appropriate taxa to use in the exploration of physiological processes controlling the expression of sexual dimorphism. This work is an example of how emergent properties from phylogenetic analyses can be used to formulate and test hypotheses of process and pattern of evolutionary change. [Frog; Rana; hormone; sexual dimorphism; parental care.]
The historical approach (Greene, 1986; Coddington, 1988; Baum and Larson, 1991), including the mapping of characters of interest on preexisting phylogenies (e.g., Donoghue, 1989), is a powerful tool for examining evolutionary patterns related to adaptation and for testing specific a priori hypotheses regarding the processes of natural and sexual selection (e.g., Bjorklund, 1991; Emerson, 1994). However, little work to date has reversed that methodology and taken advantage of the emergent properties of phylogenetic analyses themselves to generate testable pattern and process predictions concerning evolutionary change. Phylogenetic hypotheses of relationship may be considered the results of a systematic study, but these relationships in turn can constitute observations in these other kinds of studies. In this situation, information provided by the phylogeny is used to formulate and test hypotheses.
Although approaches such as quantitative genetics and experimental embryology (e.g., Doyle, 1994; Monteiro et al., 1994) have increased our knowledge of the genetic and developmental mechanisms controlling morphological change, much less emphasis has been placed on investigating the links between evolutionary shifts and
the proximate physiological processes that mediate phenotypic expression (Crews, 1987). This lack of attention to intermediate level processes can be seen particularly clearly in studies on the evolution of secondary sexual characteristics and sexual selection. Research has focused on the developmental and genetic origins of sexually dimorphic features (e.g., Bird and Schaffer, 1972; Eckhart, 1992) and how selection acts on that morphology (e.g., Balmford et a l , 1994; Howard et al., 1994; Meagher, 1994). Although the hormonal basis of sexual dimorphism is fairly well understood (e.g., Lofts, 1984), few evolutionary studies have incorporated consideration of the physiological processes controlling the expression of secondary sexual characteristics (but see Kelley and Gorlick, 1990; Ryan, 1990; Ketterson et al., 1992).
In this paper, I discuss the use of information emerging from cladistic analyses to formulate hypotheses regarding intermediate level physiological processes controlling the evolution of secondary sexual characteristics in fanged frogs. Specifically, I show how phylogenetic analyses have led to testable hypotheses regarding not only evolutionary patterns but also hormonal mechanisms related to the origin of sexu-
278
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 EMERSON—PHYLOGENIES AND PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES 279
ally dimorphic morphological and behavioral novelties in an unusual group of Southeast Asian frogs.
BACKGROUND
The Frogs
are clearly derived. All putative outgroup taxa lack these characteristics and have instead the common suite of anuran secondary sexual characteristics (vocal sacs, nuptial pads, enlarged forearm flexors; Emerson and Berrigan, 1993). Furthermore, the fanged frogs and their relatives show a remarkable diversity of derived reproductive modes. Although information on natural history is scant, we do know that at least some species have direct development (Taylor, 1962), and a new species has been discovered on Sulawesi in which the females retain fertilized eggs
Proximate Hormonal Control Mechanisms
Dubois (1986) recognized over four doz-
en species of dicroglossine ranid frogs as
a probable monophyletic group, removed
them from the genus Rana, and placed
them in the genus Limnonectes. However,
until a proper systematic treatment is com-
pleted, it seems premature and potentially
confusing to use the name Limnonectes in and the tadpoles develop in the body of the literature. In this paper, members of
that group will be referred to as the fanged
frogs and their relatives. These species are
distributed from India to New Guinea (In-
ger, 1966), and they are largely restricted
to stream areas in primary and secondary
forests. Fanged frogs and their relatives ex-
hibit a number of unusual morphological
and behavioral characteristics, most of
which are sexually dimorphic (however,
not all of these characters occur in each
species). Males are larger than females.
The maximum snout-vent length of some
species exceeds 250 mm. In most species,
males and females have protruding fangs
(odontoid processes) in the lower jaw. Males have hypertrophied jaw muscles, and males and females have enlarged heads. In two species, males carry the tadpoles on their backs during part of development (Inger and Voris, 1988). In at least one species, males and females build nests in which they deposit fertilized eggs (Emerson, 1992). In two species, males develop a fleshy skin flap/button between the eyes (Taylor, 1962). Males of four species apparently lack an advertisement call (Inger, 1966). In at least one species, females have a vocalization that appears to solicit amplexus (Emerson, 1992). Additionally, the male frogs of most of these species lack the common suite of secondary sexual characteristics found in other ranid frogs: vocal sacs, nuptial pads, and enlarged forearm flexors (Duellman and Trueb, 1986).
The unusual sexually dimorphic characters of fanged frogs and their relatives
Anuran secondary sexual characteristics are under androgenic control (Lofts, 1984). Testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) are both capable of affecting the expression of anuran secondary sexual characteristics (e.g., Melichna et al, 1972; Kelley and Pfaff, 1976). Steroid action in sexual differentiation has been broken into two general patterns: organizational and activational (see reviews by Kelley, 1988; Moore, 1991). Organizational influences originally were thought to be confined to a limited time (usually early) in development. In this scheme, early exposure to steroid hormones organizes the capacity to produce certain types of sexual differentiation, and these sexual differences emerge at a later developmental stage when activated by some critical hormone level. These types of sexual dimorphism are permanent. In contrast, activational effects are restricted to sexually mature individuals, and these effects can be reversed. These sexually dimorphic traits are not differentiated early in development and their presence/absence is determined only by androgen level in the adult animal. Although more recent work has indicated that the organization-activation dichotomy may be too simplistic (Arnold and Breedlove,
1985), the general theory remains an im-
the female (Iskandar, 1996). Other species build nests, and in others the males carry the tadpoles on their backs.
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  280 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
portant tool for studying sexual differentiation.
In summary, research in experimental endocrinology and neurobiology has verified that (1) androgen levels play a key role in the development and expression of morphological secondary sexual characteristics in frogs, (2) most of the sexually dimorphic features lacking in fanged frogs (nuptial pads, enlarged forearm flexors, advertisement vocalization) are dependent on androgen level in the adult frog for their expression, and (3) gonadal steroids interact with neuropeptides in the central nervous system of anuran species investigated
Experimental hormone work has estab-
lished that certain types of sexual dimor-
phism in frogs are activational in origin
and under the influence of adult androgen
levels. No early organizational differentia-
tion seems to take place. Adult females
given androgens develop these traits, and
males that are castrated lose the traits. The
traits vary seasonally in adult males (in the
field) with shifting androgen levels and
breeding condition (e.g., Inger and Green-
berg, 1956; Licht et al., 1983). These traits to affect sexually dimorphic reproductive
include nuptial pads (Kelley and Pfaff, 1976, and references therein), forearm flexor size (Muller et al., 1969; Melichna et al., 1972; Sidor and Blackburn, 1994), male advertisement calls (Schmidt, 1983; Hannigan and Kelley, 1986), and vocal sac pigmentation (Greenberg, 1942). However, sexually dimorphic features such as body size, cranial shape, and the structure (and/or size) of the vocal apparatus are thought to have an organizational basis (Kelley and Tobias, 1989; Hayes and Licht, 1992). These differences are permanent and emerge gradually over the course of development with rising androgen levels. The mechanism of androgen control for the vocal sac is uncertain (Greenberg, 1942; Inger, 1956; Inger and Greenberg, 1956).
In amphibians, testosterone, DHT, and estradiol are all involved in the regulation of sexually dimorphic reproductive behaviors (e.g., Moore, 1987, and references therein; Orchinik et al., 1988; Kelley and Tobias, 1989). But in many cases, including male vocalization, the gonadal steroids do not act alone (Palka and Gorbman, 1973). In the central nervous system of frogs that have been studied, these steroids interact with the neuropeptide arginine vasotocin (AVT) to affect vocalizations (Penna et al., 1992). Furthermore, concentrations of AVT in the brains of frogs differ between males and females and are steroid sensitive (Boyd, 1994a, 1994b). For most species, both AVT and androgens are necessary to provoke male advertisement vocalization (Moore, 1987; Boyd, 1992).
behaviors, including male advertisement vocalization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The historical approach employed in this study depends on a broad range of systematic, behavioral, and endocrinological data collected over a considerable time span. New data on molecular sequences and reproductive morphology are combined with recent results of androgen replacement experiments and older systematic and hormone data that have already been published. I first outline the methodology used to obtain the new molecular and morphological data and present the results of that work and then intercalate these newer findings with the older data to demonstrate the use of information emerging from cladistic analyses to formulate hypotheses regarding intermediate level physiological processes controlling evolutionary change.
Molecular Data
Tissue samples were collected for seven species of fanged frogs and their relatives. Two regions of the mitochondrial genome, 12S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and 16S
'rRNA, were sequenced using standard molecular techniques (see Hillis et al., 1990). A phenol-chloroform extraction was used to obtain DNA from frozen tissue. Amplification was by polymerase chain reaction. Single-strand templates were used for sequencing. Primers for 12S and 16S rRNA were taken from Hedges et al. (1993). A total of 1,159 base pairs were se-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 1996 EMERSON—PHYLOGENIES AND PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
281
quenced from tissue samples of single individuals of Rana blythi from Sabah (Borneo); -R. blythi from peninsular Malaysia; R. finchi, R. palavanensis, R. ingeri, a n d R. paramacrodon from Borneo; and R. limnocharis. (A single specimen was used to represent each species because preliminary work determined that interindividual variation in base pairs of R. blythi from Sabah was negligible.) The species chosen represent three levels of divergence based on the morphological study (Emerson and Berrigan, 1993). Rana Hmnocharis was designated as the outgroup taxon because of its position in the initial phylogenetic hypothesis based on morphology and to avoid the potential problems of selecting outgroups that are too distantly related to the species under study (Lanyon, 1994; Smith, 1994). Sequences have accession numbers U55262-U55275 in GenBank.
Sequences were aligned by eye using the conserved motif (Hickson et al., 1996) and secondary structure (Kjer, 1995) approaches. Parsimony analysis of the data was done with the PAUP software package (version 3.1.1; Swofford, 1993). The input matrix included 1,175 characters from the 12S and 16S sequences. The combined 12S and 16S rRNA data set included seven taxa. Indels were coded as present/absent and comprised 16 characters of the combined data set. Both transitions and transversions were included in the analysis because recent work has indicated that transversional weighting may not work well for ribosomal genes (Simon et al., 1994). Regions that could not be aligned with reasonable certainty were excluded from the analysis. Character mapping was conducted using MacClade 3.0 (Maddison and Maddison, 1992).
Morphological Data
Egg size was measured in adult females of 19 species of fanged frogs and 16 species of outgroup ranids belonging to the genus Hylarana. The diameters of the 12 largest eggs were measured for each female, using an ocular micrometer on a Wild dissecting microscope. Measurements were done on museum specimens
R. blythi
West Malaysia
R. paramacrodon
R. finchi
R. palavanensis
R. Hmnocharis
FIGURE 1. Cladogram of relationship for seven species of fanged frogs (Rana)based on molecular data from 12S and 16S rRNA. Numbers indicate percentage of times that a branch was recovered in 100 bootstrap samples. Species that lack an advertisement call are indicated by the cartoon frog without an inflated throat.
from the collection at the Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago.
RESUL TS
Molecular Data
There were 325 variable sites, 122 of which were potentially informative. The single most-parsimonious tree had a length of 553 steps (Fig. 1). The next closest tree was two steps longer. The consistency index without uninformative characters was 0.62. A distribution of 10,000 random trees based on the data was significantly skewed (ga = -1.169969, significance level determined from values of Hillis [1991]), indicating that there is phylogenetic information in the data set. Bootstrap values from 100 replicates show only limited support for the monophyly of R. blythi. The peninsular Malaysian form may be more closely related to R. ingeri than to the Bornean R. blythi (Fig. 1).
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  282
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
VOL. 45
O) lit
direct development
males carry tadpoles
*
o
male & female build nest V ^
oo. —
,—-—
«• it?
O OoJiS;
\ OO
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Snout-vent length (mm)
Morphological Data
Figure 2 is a plot of mean maximum egg
size as a function of female snout-vent
length for species of fanged frogs as com-
pared with outgroup ranids belonging to
morphism for most of the species of fanged frogs in which egg size was also measured (Emerson, 1994). The fanged frog species that have the relatively largest eggs, Rana hasheana, R. finchi, and R. pala-
oo
^ s
eggs laid away from water
FIGURE 2. Mean maximum egg diameter plotted against snout-vent length for fanged frogs and their relatives ( • ) and outgroup species of the genus Hylarana (O). Reproductive mode is indicated where known. Line represents the relationship of mean maximum egg diameter to snout-vent length for species of Hylarana.
the subgenus Hylarana. Most Hylarana are vanensis, show the least amount of sexual
characterized by laying many eggs in water and providing no parental care. Generally, the eggs of fanged frogs and their relatives are larger than those of the outgroup species. The only exceptions are the Hylarana that construct nests and thus have a derived type of reproduction that is also characterized by relatively large egg size (Fig. 3).
Recently, another explanation for variation in egg size (in birds) has been suggested (Weatherhead and Teather, 1994). Species that show a large degree of sexual dimorphism in which males are larger may have bigger eggs because there is a cost to growing larger (especially in juveniles) and starting from a larger egg partly ameliorates that cost (see Weatherhead and Teather, 1994, for details of the argument). Data are available on degree of sexual di-
dimorphism (Emerson and Berrigan, 1993; Emerson, 1994) and some of the most derived reproductive behaviors. Thus, large egg size is unlikely to be a function of sexual dimorphism in this clade.
DISCUSSION
The bizarre complex of secondary sexual characteristics and the unusual diversity of reproductive modes coupled with the information available on the hormonal control of sexually dimorphic morphology and behavior and the systematics of the group make the fanged frogs and their relatives a model system for examining the role of intermediate physiological processes in the evolution of morphological and behavioral novelties. Information gleaned from systematics and character optimization studies can lead to new testable hy-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 EMERSON—PHYLOGENIES AND PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES 283
O)
UJ
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Snout-vent length (mm)
FIGURE 3. Mean maximum egg diameter plotted against snout-vent length for fanged frogs and their relatives (•), outgroup species of Hylarana with small eggs and no parental care (O), and outgroup species of Hylarana with nests (+).
potheses and insights regarding the evolution of sexual dimorphism.
Initial Predictions and Analysis
An initial phylogenetic study based on a combination of morphological and behavioral characteristics was conducted on 19 exemplar taxa (Emerson and Berrigan, 1993). Subsequently, the nodes where the sexually dimorphic morphological and behavioral reproductive characters were lost or acquired were identified on the phylogenetic trees (Fig. 4). The common set of secondary sexual characteristics of ranid frogs, most of which are under adult androgen level control (i.e., nuptial pads, vocal sacs, and enlarged forelimb flexors), were lost at the base of the clade, and the derived secondary sexual characters, such as enlarged heads, hypertrophied jaw muscles, and large male size, evolved later in the history of the group (Fig. 4).
Character optimization also revealed that the loss of vocal sacs, nuptial pads, and enlarged forelimb flexors occurs at the same point in the phylogeny as does the
evolution of a derived breeding behavior, specifically male parental care. Nuptial pads and enlarged forelimb flexors appear to be determined by adult androgen levels; these characters develop in response to rising levels of testosterone a n d / o r DHT. A decrease in androgen level has been implicated in the regulation of male parental care in some vertebrates (Wingfield et al., 1990, and references therein). Male birds have lower androgen levels (testosterone and DHT) when exhibiting parental care than during other times in their reproductive cycle (Wingfield et al., 1990). Similarly, in the one frog that has been studied, Eleutherodactylus coqui, males exhibiting parental care had lower androgen levels than males engaged in other reproductive activities, including advertisement calling (Townsend and Moger, 1987).
The juxtaposition of the loss of the suite of secondary sexual characteristics under adult androgen level control with the evolution of male parental care in the fanged frog lineage suggests that a decrease in androgen levels may have been the proxi-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 284
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
VOL. 45
males > females enlarged heads hypertrophied jaw muscles
Rana cyanophlyctis Rana cancrivora
Rana occipitalis Rana limnocharis Rana lima
Rana laevis Rana plicatella Rana pileata Rana nitida
Rana hascheana Rana blythi
Rana ingeri
Rana ibanorum Rana paramacrodon Rana kuhli
Rana namiyei
Rana laticeps
Rana finchi
Rana palavanensis Rana leytensis
fangs
modified breeding behavior loss of nuptial pads
loss of enlarged forelimb flexors
males call in choruses (50-64 mm)
single males call, 2000 eggs (52-82 mm) ?
males in choruses, 1500 eggs (32-65 mm)
males call (21-48 mm)
? (32-40 mm)
males call (50-72 mm)
? (37-71 mm)
direct development, males call from nest (30-40 mm) no male call, m/f build nest, 1800 eggs (80-225 mm) no male call, 1600 eggs (70-130 mm)
no male call, 1100 eggs (80-125 mm)
males call (47-75 mm)
no male call some populations (45-90 mm)
males call, breeding nests (72-120 mm)
males call (29-51 mm)
males call/carry tadpoles, 14-57 eggs (30-40 mm)
males call, stay with eggs on rocks/leaves, 4-60 eggs (34-57 mm)
FIGURE 4.
1994). Numbers indicate percentage of times that a branch was recovered in 2,000 bootstrap samples. The nodes at which secondary sexual characters are gained or lost are indicated. Adult snout-vent length (in parentheses) and facts concerning the reproductive biology of the terminal taxa are included.
A phylogeny of the fanged frogs and their relatives (from Emerson and Berrigan, 1993; Emerson,
mate physiological mechanism responsible for the initial loss of the primitive suite of secondary sexual characteristics in this group. If this were the case, terminal (extant) taxa lacking nuptial pads, vocal sacs, and enlarged forelimb flexors would be predicted to (1) have low androgen levels relative to outgroup ranids and (2) show a derived reproductive pattern relative to that characterizing outgroup taxa in which large numbers of eggs are laid in streams or ponds and there is no parental care (Emerson and Voris, 1992).
Initially, these two predictions were tested in Rana blythi. This species was chosen for study because of its large size and relative abundance and the fact that the males lack an advertisement call (Inger, 1966) in addition to lacking nuptial pads, vocal sacs, and enlarged forelimb flexors. Also, this species might construct nests (Dring, 1979), which suggests that male parental care might occur.
blythi in Sabah, Malaysia, on the island of Borneo has an unusual and derived reproductive pattern in which (1) the male lacks an advertisement call, (2) the female makes
a vocalization that appears to solicit amplexus from the male (Emerson, 1992), (3) the male and female together construct a nest in which fertilized eggs are deposited, and (4) the male is found repeatedly around the nest after the eggs are laid but the female is not (Emerson, 1992). Additionally, as predicted, breeding male R. blythi appear to have low androgen levels relative to other breeding ranid and tropical frogs that have been examined (Emerson et al., 1993; Fig. 5). Testosterone levels are <50% and DHT levels are <30% of those recorded for breeding male R. catesbeiana (Licht et al., 1983). Furthermore, when males of R. blythi are given DHT supplements, they show a significant increase in the development of the epidermal thumb pad tissue (Fig. 6).
Subsequent fieldwork revealed that R.
In this one species of fanged frog, both
     Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996
EMERSON—PHYLOGENIES AND PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
285
  QS
-Q CO CO CO CD
.CO
FIGURE 6. Mean thumb pad tissue thickness in male Rana blythi given DHT supplements and in control frogs. Differences in degree of thumb pad development were significant (ANOVA, F]7 = 6.109, P < 0.05) (Emerson, unpubl. data).
opment and parental care, have larger eggs than do frogs with a more typical aquatic tadpole and no parental care (Salthe and Duellman, 1973). The large egg size of the fanged frogs, especially the smaller spe-
I
CO
I oI
(35 O3
CD CO
cc
T3 CD CD
00
.Q
c o c
co CO .co c
DHT
control
FIGURE 5. Levels of testosterone and DHT in
breeding male Rana blythi, nonbreeding R. catesbeiana,cies, appears to be related to reproductive and breeding R. catesbeiana (from Emerson et al., mode and suggests that the fanged frogs 1993).
predictions on androgen level and repro-
ductive pattern were confirmed. But what
about other ingroup taxa? Can we infer
their reproductive patterns even though
we lack data on hormone levels? Figure 4
lists the existing information regarding the
reproductive biology of all the terminal
taxa in the preliminary phylogenetic anal-
ysis. Currently, for most species we lack
the critical behavioral data needed to test
directly the prediction of modified reproduction in the clade. However, the morvocalize. Because a fair amount is known
phological data on egg size indirectly lend support to the prediction that this group of frogs has a modified or derived reproductive pattern. Comparative studies on frogs show that relative egg size is correlated with reproductive mode (Salthe and Duellman, 1973). Frogs with modified reproductive modes, including direct devel-
regarding the neuroendocrinological control of vocalization, the molecular phylogeny of the fanged frogs (Fig. 1) makes it possible to select appropriate taxa and use a comparative approach to gain insights into the mechanistic origin of this novel evolutionary loss.
The molecular differences between pen-
Q. LLJ
0.15 -|
0.05-
and their relatives have modified breeding patterns. This pattern of derived reproduction is consistent with the original hypothesis that a shift in androgen levels may be involved in the evolution of the derived and diverse sexual dimorphisms and reproductive behaviors in these frogs.
Additional Phylogenetic Analysis and Predictions
It is very unusual for frogs to lack an advertisement call (Emerson, 1994), but the males of R. blythi, R. ibanorum, R. ingeri, and some populations of R. kuhli do not
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  286
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
FIGURE 7.
the advertisement call in fanged frogs (I) on tree topology from Figure 6. Striped brandies (=equivocal) denote that either presence or absence of vocalization is possible.
insular and Bornean R. blythi are consistent with the reported variation in male vocalization between frogs from these two geographical areas (Kiew, 1990; Emerson, 1992, pers. obs.). Male frogs referred to R. blythi on Borneo lack an advertisement call, but male frogs referred to R. blythi on peninsular Malaysia have an advertisement call. The frog cartoons in Figure 1 illustrate the distribution of male advertisement vocalization in the terminal taxa in the phylogeny derived from the molecular data set. Figure 7 shows male vocalization optimized onto the molecular phylogeny. The possession of an advertisement call by males is considered to be the primitive condition based on outgroup comparison. The results of this analysis indicate that the data are equivocal with regard to the evolution of the loss of vocalization in the Bornean R. blythi and R. ingeri. One possibility is that loss of the advertisement call occurred at the base of the group, in which case vocalization in the peninsular Malaysian R. blythi would be secondarily derived. The alternative possibility would have loss of the advertisement call occur-
Rana blythi
Borneo
Rana ingeri
Rana blythi
West Malaysia
Rana paramacrodon
Rana finchi
Rana palavanensis
Rana limnocharis
ring independently in the Bornean R. blythi and R. ingeri.
The finding that vocalization in the peninsular R. blythi may be secondarily derived has important implications for selecting taxa to test hypotheses regarding the physiological processes involved in the loss of the advertisement call. Instead of limiting comparisons to those between the Bornean and peninsular R. blythi, the phylogeny indicates the need to include a third species, such as R. paramacrodon, in which it is well established that vocalization is the primitive condition. This particular experimental design may have been overlooked in the absence of this phylogenetic information.
The knowledge from the phylogenetic analysis in conjunction with (1) the neuroendocrinological information that AVT and DHT are involved in the control of advertisement vocalization in male frogs and (2) the fact that Bornean R. blythi have low DHT levels suggest two testable hypotheses regarding the physiological processes involved in the evolution of the loss of the male advertisement call and the species to examine. These hypotheses involve comparing AVT receptor concentrations and androgen hormone levels among peninsular JR. blythi, Bornean R. blythi, and R. paramacrodon. Hypothesis 1 posits that noncalling Bornean R. blythi have lower AVT receptor concentrations than the other two calling species and thus lack an advertisement call. Hypothesis 2 is that the lack of an advertisement call in the Bornean R. blythi is related to the unusually low DHT levels found in this species and that the peninsular R. blythi and R. paramacrodon have DHT levels that are equivalent to those in other species that have been studied. These possibilities may not be mutually exclusive. The lack of AVT receptors could also simply be an activational effect of low DHT levels. This connection can be tested through hormone supplement experiments, and work is currently underway examining these various explanations.
SUMMARY
Phylogenies can provide (1) a cladistic framework for testing historical hypothe-
Most-parsimonious evolution of loss of
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 