Current Biology 22, 445–449, March 6, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10.1016/j.cub.2012.01.054
Adaptive Evolution of C4 Photosynthesis through Recurrent Lateral Gene Transfer
Pascal-Antoine Christin,1,* Erika J. Edwards,1
Guillaume Besnard,2 Susanna F. Boxall,3 Richard Gregory,4 Elizabeth A. Kellogg,5 James Hartwell,3
and Colin P. Osborne6
1Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, 80 Waterman Street, Providence, RI 02912, USA 2Laboratoire Evolution & Diversite ́ Biologique, CNRS-UPS-ENFA, UMR 5174, 1062 Toulouse, France 3Department of Plant Sciences
4Centre for Genomic Research
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK
5Department of Biology, University of Missouri, St. Louis, One University Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63121, USA 6Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK
Summary
C4 photosynthesis is a complex trait that confers higher productivity under warm and arid conditions [1–3]. It has evolved more than 60 times via the co-option of genes present in C3 ancestors followed by alteration of the patterns and levels of expression and adaptive changes in the coding sequences [4–12], but the evolutionary path to C4 photosynthesis is still poorly understood. The grass lineage Alloteropsis offers unparalleled opportunities for studying C4 evolution, because it includes a C3 taxon and five C4 species that vary significantly in C4 anatomy and biochemistry [13, 14]. Using phylogenetic analyses of nuclear genes and leaf transcriptomes, we show that fundamental elements of the C4 pathway in the grass lineage Alloteropsis were acquired via a minimum of four independent lateral gene transfers from C4 taxa that diverged from this group more than 20 million years ago. The transfer of genes that were already fully adapted for C4 function has occurred periodically over at least the last 10 million years and has been a recurrent source for the optimization of the C4 pathway. This report shows that plant-plant lateral nuclear gene transfers can be a potent source of genetic novelty and adaptation in flowering plants.
Results and Discussion
Multiple Lateral Acquisitions of Key C4 Genes
We sampled geographically separated populations of four Alloteropsis taxa (Figure 1). Three taxa are reported as C4 (A. angusta, A. cimicina, and A. semialata subspecies semialata), whereas the fourth is C3 (A. semialata subspecies eckloniana). The history of photosynthetic transitions in this group is unclear [13], because the spatial compartmentalization of carbon assimilation and reduction that is instrumental to C4 photosynthesis is completely absent from the C3 A. s. eckloniana and involves nonhomologous cell types in the
*Correspondence: pascal-antoine_christin@brown.edu
different C4 Alloteropsis lineages [14]. Several multigene families were investigated by PCR amplification from genomic DNA, whereas gene transcripts from leaves were analyzed in representatives of the different taxa (see Supplemental Information available online).
We isolated genes from all A. angusta and A. semialata accessions for the C4 carbon-fixing enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc; Figure 2) that are positioned in phylogenies near those of affiliated C3 taxa (Figure 3A). The vertically acquired ppc of A. angusta has many amino acid residues that are characteristic of C4-specific forms (Figure 4A) [8], suggesting that the C4 ppc used by this species evolved via adaptive changes to the gene inherited from its C3 ancestor. However, the vertically acquired ppc of all A. s. semialata accessions has no C4-characteristics; it was present only at a very low transcript level and was not found at all in A. cimicina, ruling out a C4 function in these taxa.
C4-specific ppc genes from different Alloteropsis accessions were identified as the copy most abundantly transcribed in leaves (Supplemental Information). The ppc used for C4 photosynthesis in A. cimicina was not related to those of affiliated taxa but clustered with those of the distantly related Melinidinae (Figure 3A). This gene was also found in South African A. s. semialata, which suggests an ancient lateral ppc acquisition before the diversification of Alloteropsis (Figure 1). However, this gene appears to be nonfunctional in South African A. s. semialata (Supplemental Information), indicating that the C4 function of this ppc was lost after the divergence of the A. cimicina and A. semialata lineages. The C4 ppc of South African A. s. semialata was phylogenetically nested in the distantly related C4 Cenchrinae, among the members of the Setaria palmifolia species complex (Figure 3A). It was therefore likely acquired laterally in tropical Africa, where A. s. semialata and members of the Setaria palmifolia species complex co-occur [15]. The C4 ppc of the Australian population of A. s. semialata was nested in those of Andropogoneae (Figure 3A), a group of highly diversified C4 grasses that diverged from Alloteropsis w25 million years ago (Ma) (Figure 1). On an overlapping fragment of 719 bp, Australian A. s. semialata and the Andropogoneae taxon Themeda quadrivalvis differed at only four nucleotides, a level of polymorphism usually observed only among closely related species. The C4 ppc of Australian A. s. semialata was thus likely acquired horizontally from T. quadrivalvis or a very close relative in regions of Australia where these taxa co-occur. Because each of these laterally acquired ppc had spent several million years in the genomes of other C4 plants prior to their acquisition by Alloteropsis species (Figure 1), they had already accumulated numerous C4-characteristic residues and were fine-tuned for function in the C4 pathway (Figure 4A).
We also isolated a gene encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (pck; Figure 2), the decarboxylating enzyme of one of the C4 biochemical subtypes, from all populations of Alloteropsis, that was most closely related to the pck from affiliated C3 taxa (Figure 3B). However, this vertically transmitted gene had none of the C4-specific amino acid residues and was present only at very low transcript levels in the leaf
Repor t

 Current Biology Vol 22 No 5 446
transcriptome of C4 A. s. semialata (Supplemental Information), making a significant role in the C4 pathway highly unlikely. Instead, we isolated a second pck gene from all accessions of A. angusta and A. s. semialata, which had most of the C4-characteristic amino acid residues (Figure 4B) [9], and was the most abundant pck transcript in leaves of A. s. semialata. This C4-specific gene was not closely related to the non-C4 genes from Alloteropsis but instead was nested within C4 pck from Cenchrinae (Figure 3B). This shows that a C4 pck was transmitted from a member of Cenchrinae to the common ancestor of A. angusta and A. semialata and now fulfills a key function in the C4 pathway of these taxa.
The different phylogenetic groupings all receive strong statistical support even when only introns or third positions of codons are considered (Supplemental Information), ruling out the possibility that selective pressures misled phylogenetic reconstructions. A first transfer of C4 ppc from Melinidinae occurred prior to the divergence of all extant Alloteropsis species. It was followed by a lateral acquisition of a C4 pck from Cenchrinae after the first speciation inside Alloteropsis (Figure 1). Two additional and recent transfers involved C4 ppc from different origins and happened in geographically isolated populations of A. s. semialata.
Most of the Genome and Transcriptome Was Vertically Acquired
The lateral acquisitions of ppc and pck could have occurred during allopolyploidization events involving distantly related parents, a scenario compatible with the multiple ploidy levels observed in A. semialata [16]. After allopolyploidization, numerous genes from each parent are expected to persist in the descendants and contribute to their transcriptome even after several million years [17, 18]. We investigated the presence of additional foreign genes in Alloteropsis genomes by sequencing seven nuclear markers unrelated to
Figure 1. Time-Calibrated Phylogeny of Panicoideae and Inferred Lateral Gene Transfers
The main clades are compressed, with the size of wedges proportional to the number of species sampled, and colored in red when containing C4 species only, black for C3 species only, and yellow for both C3 and C4 species. Yellow branches indicate an uncertain ancestral state. Bayesian support values are shown as percentages near branches, when greater than 80%. These species relationships, deduced from multiple plastid markers, were also confirmed with several nuclear markers (Supplemental Information). The inferred lateral gene transfers are represented by arrows, in green for pck and blue for ppc. For A. s. semialata, geographically separated populations are indicated as follows: Aus, Australia; Thai, Thailand; SA, South Africa. Grey boxes indicate confidence intervals of the age estimates for the last node before the inferred lateral transfer and the first node after the transfer.
C4 photosynthesis, one of which is physically located adjacent to ppc in the genomes of Setaria, Sorghum, and Brachypodium (Supplemental Information). The isolated sequences were all positioned in the phylogeny near close
relatives of Alloteropsis, and no laterally acquired gene was detected. In addition, we screened the South African A. s. semialata transcriptome for phylogenetically relevant markers and successfully positioned 3,279 transcripts in phylogenies including orthologous genes extracted from the A. s. eckloniana transcriptome and whole-genome sequences for Setaria italica (C4 Cenchrinae), Sorghum (C4 Andropogoneae), rice, and Brachypodium (Supplemental Information). If other genes were transmitted from a species of the Cenchrinae alongside pck and ppc, as would occur during allopolyploidization, multiple transcripts of A. s. semialata should group with Setaria italica sequences. However, 3,275 of the 3,279 investigated transcripts strongly grouped A. s. semialata with A. s. eckloniana, and only four transcripts encoding pck and ppc grouped A. s. semialata with Setaria (Supplemental Information). These analyses show that most of the genes used by the South African A. s. semialata, including all known genes of the C4 pathway other than ppc and pck (Figure 2), were acquired vertically. Together with the analysis of lowcopy genes, the vertical inheritance of the transcriptome therefore argues strongly against allopolyploid formation as a mechanism for the lateral transmission of ppc and pck into Alloteropsis.
Possible Mechanisms and Importance of Selection
Our data indicate that the horizontal transmission of pck and ppc genes to Alloteropsis included at most a very small amount of other genetic material. However, the high similarity between intron and untranslated region (UTR) sequences of the horizontally acquired genes and those of the putative donors (Supplemental Information) indicates that the whole genes were transmitted as genomic DNA. Reports of nuclear horizontal gene transfer between plants are rare, but several mechanisms have been suggested, including vector-mediated, plant-plant contact, transformation, and illegitimate

 Lateral Spread of Adaptive Genes in Grasses
447
Figure2. Key Biochemical Steps in the Putative C4 Photosynthetic Pathway of Alloteropsis semialata
The CO2-concentrating mechanism hinges on the enzyme PEP carboxylase (PEPC) (B), which fixes inorganic carbon to produce four-carbon organic acids in the mesophyll cells of the leaf (aspartate [Asp], malate [MA]). These acids diffuse into the bundle sheath cells, where CO2 is liberated at high concentrations by decarboxylase enzymes including PEP carboxykinase (PCK) (D) and NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) (F). The CO2 is refixed by Rubisco (J), whereas the organic acceptor molecule returns to the mesophyll cells. The following metabolite abbreviations are used: Ala, alanine; Asp, aspartate; MA, malate; OAA, oxaloacetate; PA, pyruvate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate. The following enzymes (colored boxes) abbreviations are used: carbonic anhydrase (A); PEPC, PEP carboxylase (B); Asp animotransferase (C); PCK, PEP carboxykinase (D); NADP-MA dehydrogenase (E); NADP-ME, NADP-malic enzyme (F); Ala aminotransferase, (G); PA phosphate dikinase (H); Rubisco, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (J).
pollination [19, 20]. The most commonly described is direct contact via a host-parasite relationship [21, 22], which is not a possibility in the present case, because neither the putative donors nor Alloteropsis species have been reported as parasitic. Multiple cases of lateral gene transfer have involved infecting agents, viral or bacterial [19, 20, 23], and an unknown agent has been proposed for the lateral transmission of nuclear genes among distantly related grasses [24, 25]. Vector-mediated transfers are similarly possible in the case of Alloteropsis, although the necessity of a first transfer from a plant to the agent followed by a second transfer from the agent to the germ line of Alloteropsis diminishes the likelihood of this scenario. The exact mechanism for the plant-plant gene transfers shown in the present study remains speculative and could differ among the multiple cases detected. We suggest that the most reasonable scenario for the transfer of pck and ppc genes may have been during direct contact after the deposition of foreign pollen on the Alloteropsis stigma.
All grasses are pollinated largely by wind, and putative donors of the laterally acquired genes are found in close contact with Alloteropsis populations. Introgression of these genes via ordinary hybridization and successive backcrossing is unlikely. The horizontally acquired genes do not seem to recombine with native homologs, suggesting they occupy different loci (Supplemental Information). Moreover, such an introgression would require recombination between paired chromosomes from the two parental genomes that last shared a common ancestor more than 20 Ma, a period sufficient for complete turnover of noncoding intergenic regions [26], which hampers chromosomal pairing. However, the temporary mingling of foreign and native genomes, even if limited to the
Figure3. PhylogeneticPositionofAlloteropsisLaterallyTransmittedGenes
(A) Phylogeny of ppc in Panicoideae.
(B) Phylogeny of pck in Panicoideae.
Alloteropsis genes are highlighted with a larger font, with vertically acquired genes in black and laterally acquired genes in red. Both phylogenies were inferred from the third positions of codons. Branches leading to C4-specific genes are in blue and green. Clades in light blue and yellow contain both C4 and non-C4 genes (see Supplemental Information for details). Several clades encompassing only C4 taxa contain both C4 and non-C4 genes due to gene duplications (Supplemental Information). Bayesian support values are shown as percentages near branches when greater than 80%. Aus, Australia; SA, South Africa.
A
B

 Current Biology Vol 22 No 5 448
A
B
Figure 4.
mitted Genes
For native and foreign genes of Alloteropsis, amino acid residues are shown for positions that are known to be under positive selection for C4 function [8, 9]. Putative C4-adaptive residues are in black boxes. The amino acids at these positions are identical in the putative donors, with the exceptions of ppc 625, which is variable in Melinidinae, and pck 149, which is variable in Cenchrinae.
(A) Genes for PEPC (ppc). The 12 sites with the highest probability of C4specific selection [8] are shown. Numbering is based on the Zea mays sequence (CAA33317).
(B) Genes for PCK (pck). Numbering is based on the Zoysia japonica sequence (AB199899).
early stages of reproduction (e.g., pollen tube growth or early embryonic development), could provide sufficient opportunity for the transfer of genes via retrotransposons or other genomic rearrangements [27, 28]. In controlled conditions, foreign pollen from grasses that diverged more than 45 Ma can germinate and initiate embryo development, with the occasional transmission of paternal genetic material to mostly maternal descendants [29, 30]. Even if the fitness of the resulting offspring is reduced, subsequent crosses with other Alloteropsis individuals would allow the integration of foreign genes into the population, especially if the transmitted genes are strongly favored by natural selection.
The laterally acquired genes both encode key enzymes of the C4 pathway (Figure 2) whose evolution from non-C4 genes requires a series of important genetic changes [7–9]. Before their transmission to Alloteropsis, the foreign copies of ppc and pck had spent more than 15 Ma in the genomes of other C4 plants and were highly optimized for C4 function. We hypothesize that they were incorporated into Alloteropsis plants that operated a suboptimal C4 cycle, with genes that were not fully adapted for function in the C4 pathway, as is apparently still the case in the Thai A. s. semialata (Figure 4; Supplemental Information). The replacement of these vertically acquired genes by laterally acquired genes that were better optimized for the C4 pathway improved the efficiency of Alloteropsis C4 pathway, and natural selection led to a rapid fixation of the transferred genes in populations.
Concluding Remarks
The Alloteropsis case demonstrates a remarkable permeability of species boundaries in some grasses and shows that natural selection on the rare and random exchanges of genes between distantly related species can lead to the horizontal spread of adaptive biochemical novelties. The high number of lateral transfers reported here could indicate that Alloteropsis taxa are especially prone to lateral acquisitions, because of genomic plasticity or other lifestyle characteristics that increase the likelihood of lateral transfer in some species
[31], such as the short time to first seed production in Alloteropsis taxa (typically less than 1 year). Additionally, the photosynthetic variation observed in Alloteropsis might indicate that the transition to full C4 function occurred multiple times over a long evolutionary period from poorly optimized C4 or C3–C4 intermediates (Figure 1), providing continued opportunity to receive foreign C4 genes that further optimized the C4 pathway. The extent to which this evolutionary process applies to other groups is difficult to evaluate. No conclusive evidence has been found for lateral acquisition in the C4 taxa previously surveyed [7–9, 32], with the exception of the sedge Eleocharis vivipara, which acquired a C4 ppc gene from a congeneric [32], but lateral gene transfer can be detected only with a large species sampling for which a solid understanding of the phylogenetic relationships is known.
Our discovery of lateral transfer of C4 genes in Alloteropsis was possible for four important reasons. First, genomic data is available for certain grass crops, some of which happen to be close relatives of our donor species. Second, compared with other complex traits, we have a relatively good understanding of the enzymes involved in this metabolic pathway, and previous work has generated sequences of C4 genes for a large number of grasses [8, 9]. Third, genes for C4 enzymes are highly expressed and are thus easily captured by transcriptome analyses. Finally, a set of adaptive amino acid changes to enzymes recruited to the C4 pathway have been previously identified, revealing the evolutionary significance of the genes acquired laterally [7–10]. Without this breadth and depth of background knowledge, the present case would likely have remained undetected. There is no reason to think that this mechanism would be unique to the evolution of the C4 pathway. As more genomic data accumulate for other taxa, additional cases of adaptive plant-plant nuclear gene transfers may be discovered, in a great variety of adaptive traits.
Accession Numbers
The sequences generated in this paper were deposited in GenBank database, under the accession numbers FR845806–FR845993 and FR872768– FR872793. The alignments used for phylogenetic inference, the inferred phylogenetic trees, and the 454 contigs used for phylogenomic analyses have been deposited in the Dryad Repository under the doi 10.5061/ dryad.m1h5c85d.
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information includes three figures, two tables, and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online at doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.01.054.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Marie Curie International Outgoing Fellowship 252568 and the Swiss National Science Foundation grant PBLAP3129423 to P.-A.C., and the Natural Environment Research Council Molecular Genetics Facility small projects scheme grant MGF234 to C.P.O. and J.H. The US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute provided sequencing and analyses under the Community Sequencing Program supported by the Office of Science of the US Department of Energy under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We thank Jon Slate, Terry Burke, Julie Gray, David Beerling, Richard Leegood, and Christian Parisod for useful discussions and critical comments on this manuscript.
Received: December 5, 2011 Revised: January 12, 2012 Accepted: January 25, 2012 Published online: February 16, 2012
Presence of Putative C4-Adaptive Amino Acids on Laterally Trans-
