Ecological Monographs, 82(2), 2012, pp. 239–256 Ó 2012 by the Ecological Society of America
Experimental test of phytoplankton competition for nutrients and light in poorly mixed water columns
JARAD P. MELLARD,1,4 KOHEI YOSHIYAMA,2 CHRISTOPHER A. KLAUSMEIER,1 AND ELENA LITCHMAN3
1W. K. Kellogg Biological Station and Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, 3700 E Gull Lake Drive, Hickory Corners, Michigan 49060 USA
2River Basin Research Center, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido Gifu 501 1193 Japan
3W. K. Kellogg Biological Station and Department of Zoology, Michigan State University, 3700 E. Gull Lake Drive, Hickory Corners, Michigan 49060 USA
Abstract. A recent theory of the vertical distribution of phytoplankton considers how interacting niche construction processes such as resource depletion, behavior, and population dynamics contribute to spatial heterogeneity in the aquatic environment. In poorly mixed water columns with opposing resource gradients of nutrients and light, theory predicts that a species should aggregate at a single depth. This depth of aggregation, or biomass maximum, should change through time due to depletion of available resources. In addition, the depth of the aggregation should be deeper under low amounts of nutrient loading and shallower under higher amounts of nutrient loading. Theory predicts total biomass to exhibit a saturating relationship with nutrient supply. A surface biomass maximum limited by light and a deep biomass maximum limited by nutrients or co-limited by nutrients and light is also predicted by theory. To test this theory, we used a motile phytoplankton species (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) growing in cylindrical plankton towers. In our experiment, the resource environment was strongly modified by the movement, self-shading, nutrient uptake, and growth of the phytoplankton. Supporting predictions, we routinely observed a single biomass maximum at the surface throughout the course of the experiment and at equilibrium under higher nutrient loading. However, at equilibrium, low nutrient loading led to a non-distinct biomass maximum with the population distributed over most of the water column instead of the distinct subsurface peak predicted by theory. Also supporting predictions, total biomass across water columns was positively related to nutrient supply but saturating at high nutrient supply conditions. Further supporting predictions, we also found evidence of light limitation for a surface biomass maximum and nutrient limitation for the deep biomass when no surface maximum was present. In addition, the light level leaving the bottom of the water column declined through time as the phytoplankton grew and was negatively related to nutrient loading. Nutrients were strongly depleted where biomass was present by the end of the experiment. This experimental study shows that the vertical distribution of phytoplankton may be driven by intraspecific resource competition in space.
Key words: ESS; environmental cues; habitat selection; movement; phytoplankton; population dynamics; resource competition; resource gradients; spatial heterogeneity; vertical distribution.
INTRODUCTION
What determines the abundance and spatial distribution of organisms is one of the main questions in ecology (Brown 1984). External controls in the form of resources and stresses unevenly distributed in space along with organism-specific preferences and tolerances are commonly thought to determine spatial distributions (MacArthur 1972). However, it has long been recognized that the environment is often modified by the activities of organisms themselves (Levins 1979). In self-organizing systems, spatial patterns can form through interactions
Manuscript received 14 February 2011; revised 28 October 2011; accepted 7 November 2011. Corresponding Editor: L. Stone.
4 Present address: Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas, 1200 Sunnyside Avenue, Lawrence, Kansas 66045 USA. E-mail: mellard@ku.edu
internal to the system without intervention by external influence (Levin 1976, Klausmeier 1999, van de Koppel et al. 2008). Studies are needed that explicitly model and measure how feedbacks between the strategies of organisms and their biotic and abiotic environments determine spatial patterns (Laland et al. 1999, Hastings et al. 2007).
Phytoplankton are ideal for examining these interacting processes. Phytoplankton require nutrients and light to grow and these essential resources usually form opposing gradients in the vertical dimension in the aquatic environment (Reynolds 1984). These gradients in resources are set or enhanced by the phytoplankton themselves due to nutrient uptake and self-shading, resulting in competition for resources that may determine phytoplankton vertical distribution (Klausmeier and Litchman 2001). The hypotheses of what determines
239

240 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
the vertical distribution of phytoplankton remain largely untested (but see Carney et al. 1988) and few studies have tested hypotheses on the control of the vertical distribution of phytoplankton using experimental water columns (but see Jaeger et al. 2008b).
Vertical distributions of phytoplankton are strongly dependent on the mixing processes operating in a body of water (Huisman et al. 1999, Jaeger et al. 2008b). In a completely well-mixed water column, phytoplankton are homogenized and form no patterns in vertical distribution. However, the environment is not always well mixed, in which case we might expect pronounced patterns. Multiple distinct vertical distributions are possible in poorly mixed systems including a benthic layer, where phytoplankton form a layer directly on the sediment surface; a deep chlorophyll maximum (DCM), where phytoplankton form a layer in a poorly mixed portion of the water column away from the boundaries; and a surface layer, where phytoplankton form a layer at the surface of the water. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the formation of DCMs, such as sinking in a density stratified water column (Condie and Bormans 1997), depth dependent grazing by zooplankton or mixotrophs (Tittel et al. 2003), diel vertical migration of algae (Sommer and Gliwicz 1986, Gasol et al. 1991), behavioral responses to sensory cues (Gervais 1998, Clegg et al. 2007), disruption of vertical migration by shear (Durham et al. 2009), and preferential movement to and growth at an optimal depth in opposing resource gradients (Fee 1976, Klausmeier and Litchman 2001). We focus on this last hypothesis, how movement and growth in opposing resource gradients can determine phytoplankton vertical distributions, testing predictions from theory (Klausmeier and Litchman 2001) that are amenable to experimentation.
Motile algae in poorly mixed water columns can be thought of as playing a competitive game in the opposing resource gradients of nutrients and light (Klausmeier and Litchman 2001). Depth-regulating algae are common and represent important components of phytoplankton communities in freshwater and marine environments (Reynolds 1984, Cullen and MacIntyre 1998). Using a spatially explicit dynamical model, Klausmeier and Litchman (2001) show that motile phytoplankton can form a thin layer in poorly mixed water columns that has also been observed in the field (Fee 1976, Gasol et al. 1991, Gervais 1998, Mellard et al. 2011). They show that the steady state of a full dynamical model can be approximated by a gametheoretic model that has the advantage of providing analytical results for greater insight. The game-theoretic model considers motile algae to form an infinitely thin layer at their depth of co-limitation. This equilibrium depth, z*, is a continuously stable strategy (CSS) that prevents growth elsewhere in the water column.
When considering population dynamics, organisms may not reach a dynamic and strategic equilibrium, thus
there is a need to examine transient dynamics, which may persist for long periods and are known to be important in a range of systems, even for organisms with short generation times. Transient dynamics have long been recognized as having the potential to influence ecological systems (DeAngelis and Waterhouse 1987) and increasingly been given more attention in ecology (Hastings 2001, Snyder 2009) with new methods of analysis (Caswell 2007 ). Transient dynamics have previously been shown to be important in seasonal (Sommer et al. 1986) and long-term (Gleeson and Tilman 1990) succession and can influence phytoplankton–zooplankton coupling (Jaeger et al. 2008a) and interactions between other predators and their prey (Hastings 2001). In our experiment, we consider transient dynamics as well, due to uncertainty in whether the algae will arrive at the game-theoretic solution during the timescale of our experiment.
The model we consider makes specific predictions about the vertical distribution of algae (Klausmeier and Litchman 2001): (1) phytoplankton can form a thin layer, (2) the layer should be deeper under low-nutrient conditions and shallower under high-nutrient conditions, (3) biomass should increase with nutrient supply until it reaches light limitation, beyond which it will be constant, and (4) phytoplankton in a surface layer should be co-limited or light limited (Mellard et al. 2011), whereas phytoplankton in a benthic layer should be nutrient limited, and those in a DCM co-limited by nutrients and light. We evaluated these predictions with the aid of a dynamic model and experimental plankton towers focusing on whether algae aggregate and whether aggregation patterns depend on environmental conditions.
THEORY
We expanded on previously published theoretical work (Klausmeier and Litchman 2001) by examining the dynamics of the full model approximated by the game-theoretic model. The game-theoretic model assumes the system approaches a stable equilibrium, and some of the predictions may not be applicable for the time scale of our experiment (50 days). The gametheoretic model also assumes perfect depth regulation by the algae, which is not realistic for our experiments. Therefore, we present predictions of transient dynamics from the full dynamical model, which have not been presented before.
Full dynamical model
The full dynamical model includes spatially explicit equations for phytoplankton biomass b(z, t), nutrients R(z, t), and light I(z, t) at depth z from the surface (z 1⁄4 0) to the bottom (z 1⁄4 zb) and time t in a one-dimensional water column.
We assume that phytoplankton growth is limited by light I and nutrients R according to Liebig’s law of the minimum:

May 2012 COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 241
gðI;RÞ1⁄4min1⁄2fIðIÞ;fRðRÞ􏰊 ð1Þ
where g is the growth rate and functions fI (I ) and fR(R) are the potential growth rates as a function of the resource R or I when that resource is limiting. We use the Michaelis-Menten form for the functions in our numerical solutions, fI(I ) 1⁄4 rI/(I þ KI) and fR(R) 1⁄4 rR/(R þ KR), where r is the maximum growth rate and KI and KR are half-saturation constants for light and nutrients, respectively. Biomass is lost at density-independent rate m, which encompasses all sources of mortality. With these assumptions, net growth at depth z is only possible if both I and R are greater than the break-even levels: I* 1⁄4 fI􏰀1(m) and R* 1⁄4 f R􏰀1(m) (Tilman 1982).
Active movement by phytoplankton is assumed to be governed by the simple rule that they move vertically toward better conditions for their growth. To describe this behavior, we let phytoplankton movement depend on the gradient in growth rate, ]g/]z, with velocity v(􏰋). We assume v to be an odd decreasing function that approaches vmax as ]g/]z approaches negative infinity (positive v is upward), approaches 􏰀vmax as ]g/]z approaches positive infinity, and v(0) 1⁄4 0. The specific equation we use for v is
]g 􏰥􏰜]g 􏰝 v1⁄4􏰀vmax ]z ]zþKswim :
Following Klausmeier and Litchman (2001), change in biomass b is expressed by the balance of growth g(I, R), loss m, passive movement with eddy diffusion coefficient D, and active movement v(]g/]z):
ð2Þ
Nutrients R are taken up by phytoplankton with a yield Y of biomass per unit nutrient consumed, are mixed vertically with eddy diffusion coefficient D, and are recycled from dead phytoplankton with proportion e:
]R b ]2R b
]t 1⁄4􏰀gðI;RÞYþD]z2 þemY: ð3Þ
For boundary conditions of Eq. 2, we assume that phytoplankton do not leave or enter the water column:
􏰌]b 􏰜]g􏰝􏰍􏰖􏰖
D]zþv]zb􏰖􏰖 1⁄40: ð4Þ
z1⁄40;zb
For boundary conditions of Eq. 3, we assume that
nutrients have no surface flux but diffuse into the water
column from the sediments where they have fixed
concentration R at a rate proportional to the in
concentration difference across the interface:
]R􏰖􏰖􏰖 1⁄40 ]R􏰖􏰖􏰖 1⁄4h1⁄2R􏰀RðzÞ􏰊 ð5Þ ]z􏰖 ]z􏰖 in b
z1⁄40 z1⁄4zb
where the permeability of the interface is described by h.
Light follows Lambert-Beer’s law, decreasing due to
attenuation from phytoplankton biomass and back-
ground turbidity (Kirk 1975):
􏰜􏰌Zz 􏰍􏰝
  2 􏰌􏰜􏰝􏰍 ]b1⁄41⁄2gðI;RÞ􏰀m􏰊bþD] bþ ] v ]g b :
where abg is the background light attenuation coefficient and a is the light attenuation coefficient per phytoplankton biomass.
Model analysis and parameterization
We simulated the full model following Huisman and Sommeijer (2002). In addition, we employed the MonsiSaeki formulation (Monsi and Saeki 1953) for lightlimited growth within each bin. We parameterized the model to match our experimental setup. We simulated the model over the same time course as the experiment (50 days) with initial conditions approximating the experiment (homogenized biomass and a linear gradient of nutrients). We assume phosphorus to be the limiting nutrient in the model.
Parameters were either measured independent of the experiment or back calculated from the experiment (Table 1). The incoming light at the surface, Iin, was measured as the photosynthetically active radiation just beneath the surface in a tower filled with water before the experiment began. The values for a and abg were determined by regressions of light on integrated biomass values for all towers and sampling times. Specifically, Iin was set to 43 lmol photons􏰋m􏰀2􏰋s􏰀1 and log(Iin/Iout) was regressed on integrated biomass. The slope of this regression is a, the algal attenuation coefficient. The yintercept divided by zb is abg, the background light attenuation. The nutrient concentration at the sediments, Rin, was the dissolved phosphorus concentration injected at the bottom of the towers. The sediment– water-column permeability, h, was calculated from the equations of nutrient flux using the highest nutrient tower and a regression for the portion of the experiment when a surface layer of algae was well formed. The water column depth, zb, was measured before and during the experiment. Prior to the experiment, the maximum growth rate, r, the phosphorus half-saturation constant, KR, and the light half-saturation constant, KI, were determined for the strain of Chlamydomonas used in the experiment by fitting a growth–phosphorus curve to growth rates in different phosphorus treatments (C. Steiner, personal communication) and a growth–irradiance curve to growth rates in different irradiance treatments (A. Schwaderer, personal communication).
The mortality rate, m, was at least the average proportion of total media removed from the experiment in a day (1⁄40.0009 d􏰀1) and we chose a commonly estimated mortality rate of 0.1 d􏰀1. The cellular phosphorus quota, q, was calculated from particulate phosphorus measurements at the end of the experiment by averaging this quota value across all towers and sampling depths. The maximum swimming speed, vmax,
Iðz; tÞ 1⁄4 Iin exp 􏰀 abgz þ
abðZ; tÞdZ ð6Þ
0
    ]t ]z2 ]z ]z
        
242 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL. TABLE 1. Parameter values and sources.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
Source
experiment
experiment
experiment
experiment
experiment
dye experiment physiological
experiments (1) experiment
withdrawal and
literature physiological
experiments (1) physiological
experiments (2) experiment
experiment experiment estimate
literature (3) literature (3)
  Parameter (units)
Rin (lg P/L)
h (m􏰀1)
Iin (lmol photons􏰋m􏰀2􏰋s􏰀1)
abg (m􏰀1)
zb (m)
D (m2/d) r (d􏰀1)
m (d􏰀1)
KR (lg P/L)
KI (lmol photons􏰋m􏰀2􏰋s􏰀1) Y (cells􏰋mL􏰀1􏰋[lg P/L]􏰀1)
a (m􏰀1[cells/mL]􏰀1) Kswim (m􏰀1􏰋d􏰀1)
vmax (m/d)
e (dimensionless)
Definition Value
nutrient concentration at treatment the sediment
sediment–water-column 0.25 permeability
Range
5–5000 0.19– 0.30
37– 43 0–0.96
1.45–1.5 1–10
1.55–1.80
0.68–2.10
3.35–168
1.16 3 10􏰀5–7.19 3 10􏰀4
2.13–3.54 3 10􏰀5
 incoming light at the surface
background light attenuation
water column depth diffusion coefficient maximum growth rate
mortality rate
phosphorus half-saturation constant
light half-saturation constant
cellular phosphorus quota (Y 1⁄4 1/q)
algal attenuation coefficient swimming speed half-
saturation constant maximum swimming speed nutrient recycling
43 0.476
1.5 1 1.7
0.1
1.4 85
8.93 3 10􏰀4 2.84 3 10􏰀5
3
10 0
coefficient
Sources: 1, C. Steiner, personal communication; 2, A. Schwaderer, personal communication; 3, Reynolds (1984).
 Values reported are 95% CI.
was taken from Reynolds (1984) and represents an
estimate of a theoretical maximum for all species. The swimming speed half-saturation constant, Kswim, was set to a value that gave reasonable vertical distributions and smoothly running numerical simulations. The nutrient recycling coefficient, e was set to 0 (no instantaneous recycling). The diffusion coefficient, D, was estimated, based on previous tower experiments using a passive tracer, to be the diffusion level required to homogenize the dye over measured time periods. Specifically, we noted that dye injected at one end of the tower was homogeneously distributed throughout the tower in approximately one day corresponding to a mixing rate of 1.5 m/d, and, in a 1.5-m tower, a diffusion coefficient of 2.25 m2/d. We used a value of 1 m2/d as it is the right order of magnitude for the estimate and investigated 1– 10 m2/d to bracket our estimate.
Model predictions
Simulations suggest the following transient dynamics. Algae that start in a uniform distribution behaviorally aggregate at the surface by the end of day 1 (Fig. 1). They grow exponentially initially before nutrients are depleted in the surface, which will happen sooner in lownutrient towers (Fig. 1a) than in mid-level nutrient towers (Fig. 1b) or high-nutrient towers (Fig. 1c). In low and mid-level nutrient towers, algae move down to acquire more nutrients once they are depleted at the surface. In low-nutrient towers, algae remain at the bottom of the water column to take up the little
nutrients available if enough light penetrates there (Fig. 2). In mid-level nutrient towers, algae are predicted to form a layer somewhere between the surface and the bottom in a DCM where nutrient and light supply are balanced by the uptake and self-shading of the algae (Fig. 2). High nutrient towers result in higher biomass, so algae face intense light competition due to plentiful nutrients and remain at the surface (Fig. 2).
At equilibrium (predicted to be reached after 50 days), we predict the total biomass in a water column to be positively related to nutrient supply until the algae are completely light limited (Fig. 3a). In addition, we predict the vertical position of the thin layer to be shallower under higher nutrient conditions (Fig. 3b). We further predict the algae in the low-nutrient towers to be limited by nutrients, the algae in the mid-level nutrient towers to be co-limited, and the algae in the high-nutrient towers to be limited by light (Fig. 4).
We designed an experiment to evaluate whether these predictions are upheld in water columns under controlled settings. We manipulated one factor, nutrient supply, while holding all other factors constant.
EXPERIMENT METHODS
Experimental setup
We used cylindrical plankton towers to examine spatial distributions of phytoplankton (see Plate 1 and other pictures in the Appendix). Towers were 1.5 m high and 0.2 m in diameter and constructed from clear cast acrylic tubes (Total Plastics, Kalamazoo, Michigan,

May 2012 COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 243
 FIG. 1. Predicted total biomass (left) and depth distribution of biomass through time (right) for (a) low nutrient supply (Rin 1⁄4 5 lg P/L, where Rin is the nutrient concentration at the sediments), (b) mid-level nutrient supply (Rin 1⁄4 50 lg P/L), and (c) high nutrient supply (Rin 1⁄4 5000 lg P/L). The left plot of each part shows biomass integrated over the entire water column. Following Klausmeier and Litchman (2001) and to match our experimental data, we use cells per unit area rather than carbon mass per unit area as the measure of biomass. In the right-hand plots, biomass density is shaded so that higher biomass is in darker shades. The solid line in those plots shows the average depth of the biomass, and the dashed line shows the location of the biomass maximum.
USA). Towers had ports along the vertical dimension with silicone stoppers that were punctured with needle syringes to take samples or inject nutrients. Towers were covered with heavy-duty black plastic sheeting to maintain a unidirectional light source and increase light attenuation. Towers were illuminated 24 hours a day to maintain the light gradient with a single cool 42-watt fluorescent light (Technical Consumer Products, Aurora, Ohio, USA) above each tower. Temperature within towers was 258C across all towers and depths at the end of the experiment and is presumed to be as constant as the air temperature (228 6 18C) during the experiment. In order to have only one limiting nutrient, phosphorus, towers were filled with autoclaved WC medium (Guillard 1975) without phosphorus but with 53 all other nutrients, including bicarbonate in order to reduce the possibility for carbon limitation. Towers were inoculated with cultured Chlamydomonas reinhardtii 2935
(Carolina Biological Supply, Burlington, North Carolina, USA), a flagellated green alga commonly found in temperate freshwater lakes (Reynolds 1984). Towers were then mixed by stirring the whole column vigorously. After inoculation, we injected concentrated phosphorus (K2HPO4) at 10 depths in each tower to create a nutrient gradient initially in concentrations corresponding to the experiment treatments. We confirmed that the algae were homogeneously mixed and the nutrient gradient was present initially by withdrawing samples within an hour after injecting the phosphorus. A clear plastic sheeting (Saran Wrap; S. C. Johnson, Racine Wisconsin, USA) was placed loosely over the top of each tower during the experiment to reduce probability of contaminants and invaders but still allow gas exchange through the opening between the sheeting and the edge of the tower.

244 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
 FIG. 2. Predicted equilibrium (day 50) biomass, nutrients, and light are all scaled to their maximum to fit on one plot, but units above each plot show absolute quantities. The I* value on those plots shows the break-even light level and is relativized to the maximum light level as well.
Experiment treatments
Our towers represented an environmental gradient in nutrient loading, with increasing phosphorus concentrations injected at the bottom (deepest port). Nutrient concentrations of 5, 10, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, and 5000 lg P/L were routinely injected at the bottom of towers 1 through 8, respectively. During each sampling, some volume was removed from each tower. In order to keep the water level relatively constant as well as maintain a constant nutrient supply into the system, we injected nutrients back into the system. After most sampling days, we set up a gravity-fed nutrient addition system that slowly injected approximately 250 mL of concentrated phosphorus WC medium into the bottom port of each tower. This slow injection system took approximately 12 hours to complete each time. The days we injected nutrients are indicated by arrows on Fig. 5.
Sampling
Two main sampling schemes were employed. For the first 15 days of the experiment, 17 relatively evenly spaced ports were sampled for biological analysis and for days 16–50, 21 relatively evenly spaced ports were sampled for biological analysis. We increased our spatial resolution by adding these four other ports. For the first four days of the experiment, seven relatively evenly spaced ports were sampled for nutrient analysis and for days 5–50, eight relatively evenly spaced ports were sampled for nutrient analysis. We sampled every three to four days for the first 25 days of the experiment and every three to seven days thereafter. We ended the experiment after 50 days because we observed no further distinct changes in spatial distribution of algae, biomass was declining in most towers, and our model predicted towers should have reached equilibrium by then. We
refer to the last 20 days of the experiment as at equilibrium, since spatial distributions appeared to have reached steady state.
On each sampling date, samples were taken from each port using 22-gauge 25.4-mm hypodermic needles (Air-
FIG. 3. (a) Predicted integrated biomass (measured as hundreds of cells/cm2) and (b) depth of the algal layer as a function of nutrient concentration at the bottom. Both panels have a solid line representing simulations from the full model averaged over days 30 –50.
 
May 2012 COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 245
 FIG. 4. Predicted resource conditions within different water columns at different depths. Resource conditions for a low-nutrient supply water column (open circles), mid-level nutrient supply water column (gray donuts), and high-nutrient supply water column (solid circles, some on top of one another) are shown. Since light declines with depth, the point with the highest light value for each water column is also the shallowest depth. Note that the arrows show the resource conditions for the different predicted vertical distributions of a benthic layer, deep chlorophyll maximum (DCM), and surface layer corresponding to the depth distributions in Fig. 1. The lines are zero net growth isoclines (ZNGIs) corresponding to estimated break-even light (I*) and nutrient (R*) values.
Tite Products, Virginia Beach, Virginia, USA) in 10-mL B-D syringes (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, USA), for phytoplankton enumeration or filtered through 0.45-lm nylon, 25-mm syringe filters (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, New Hampshire, USA) and placed in 10-mL centrifuge tubes (Corning Incorporated, Corning, New York, USA) for nutrient analysis. Cell densities were measured on CASY cell counter Model TT (Scha ̈ rfe-System, Reutlingen, Germany) using a 4– 30 lm cell diameter range and preserved afterward using Lugols solution. Cells were also examined under an inverted scope to check for signs that they were alive and possible morphological changes. Dissolved phosphorus was measured using the orthophosphate method on Lachat Instruments Quick Chem 8500 (Lachat Instruments, Loveland, Colorado, USA).
At the end of the experiment we measured the C:N:P of particulate matter, chlorophyll a, and temperature at the same eight ports in the tower where dissolved nutrients were measured. Particulate carbon and nitrogen were measured by filtering samples on 25 mm Whatman GF/F pre-combusted glass fiber filters (Whatman plc, Springfield Mill, UK) before combusting them in a Costech Elemental Combustion System CHNS-O (Costech Analytical Technologies, Valencia, California, USA). Particulate phosphorus was measured by filtering samples on 25-mm Whatman GF/B acid-washed glass fiber filters, performing persulfate digestion on the filters, and then analyzed colorimetrically on a Shimadzu spectrophotometer UV-240PC (Shimadzu Scientific Instruments, Columbia, Maryland, USA) at 880 nm. Chlorophyll a was measured by filtering onto a 25-mm Whatman GF/B filter, which was extracted with ethanol and measured fluorometrically ( Welschmeyer 1994 ). We
also measured pH at two points in each tower to make sure there was not a vertical gradient in pH. Light was measured at the surface and bottom of the water columns before the experiment started, at the bottom of the water columns throughout the experiment, and through the water columns at the end of the experiment. Light was measured using a LI-COR Quantum/Radiometer/Photometer model LI-185B (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA).
Data analysis
To summarize the vertical distributions, we fit three functions to the vertical profiles of biomass and used information criteria to distinguish which function fit best (see Appendix). The three functions were: a constant (b(z) 1⁄4 c), a line (b(z) 1⁄4 nz þ c), and an exponential plus a constant (b(z) 1⁄4 ne􏰀sz þ c). We chose these functions because our data looked representative of these functions and comparing the line function and the exponential plus a constant function allowed us to distinguish if a thin layer was present or not. The exponential part of the exponential plus a constant function describes the biomass in the thin layer. There was never a peak at depth so the exponential function is pinned at the surface. We used DAICc to determine the best function (Burnham and Anderson 2002) for each profile. If the exponential plus a constant function did not fit best or found a biomass minimum at the surface then we characterized the profile to have no surface layer present. When no surface layer was present, layer biomass and width for that profile were not calculated. Surface layer biomass was calculated by integrating the exponential term over the depth of the tower; only the top few centimeters contributed much to the surface

246 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
 FIG. 5. Observed total biomass (left) and depth distribution of biomass through time (right) for (a) low nutrient supply (Rin 1⁄4 5 lg P/L), (b) mid-level nutrient supply (Rin 1⁄4 50 lg P/L), and (c) high nutrient supply (Rin 1⁄4 5000 lg P/L). The left plot of each part shows biomass integrated over the entire water column. In the right plot of each part, biomass density is shaded so that higher biomass is in darker shades. The solid line on that plot shows the average depth of the biomass, and the dashed line shows the location of the biomass maximum. For clarity, depth scale on panel (c) (high nutrients) is different from panels (a) and (b), but biomass still exists below the surface maximum of panel (c). The small arrows along the bottom indicate the days that phosphorus was injected at the bottom of the towers.
layer biomass due to the exponential decay in the equation. Background biomass was calculated as czb from the best fit function, where zb is tower depth. When a surface layer was present, total biomass was calculated as the sum of surface layer biomass and background biomass. The characteristic layer thickness was calculated as 1/s. When a surface layer was not present, the line function always fit better than the constant so total biomass was calculated using the line function and integrated using the trapezoid rule.
Linear regression and piecewise linear regression was conducted on equilibrium log(biomass) vs. log(nutrient supply) because the biomass data exhibited heteroscedasticity. Relationships were also checked for significant quadratic terms but none were found. Linear regressions were also run on modal depth for days 30–50, log light at the bottom, and all chlorophyll, nutrient, and stoichiometric response variables with log nutrient
supply as the independent continuous variable for all towers. ANCOVAs were run on all chlorophyll, nutrient, and stoichiometric response variables with log(nutrient supply) as the independent continuous variable and surface vs. deep as the independent categorical variable for towers that had a surface layer present at the end of the experiment (treatments 100– 5000 lg P/L). Statistical analyses were performed in Mathematica v7 (Wolfram Research, Champaign, Illinois, USA) and R v2.10 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Data have been deposited in the Dryad repository (see Supplemental Material: Data Availability)
EXPERIMENT RESULTS
All towers showed initial behavioral aggregation of the algae in response to resource gradients, where algae went from a uniform distribution on day 0 to

May 2012 COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 247
 FIG. 6. Observed biomass, nutrients, and light on day 50 are all scaled to their maximum to fit on one plot, but units above each plot show absolute quantities. The I* value on those plots shows break-even light level and is relativized to the maximum light level as well.
aggregating at the surface by day 1 (Fig. 5 shows representative results). Once aggregated (Fig. 5), algae depleted nutrients locally through growth and moved down if nutrients were limiting (Fig. 5a and b). At the end of the experiment, algae in the lowest nutrient treatment were relatively evenly distributed with a biomass minimum at the surface (Fig. 6). Sufficient light penetrated to the bottom so that Iout . I*, the break-even light level (Huisman and Weissing 1994, 1995). Nutrients were in low abundance throughout the water column (Fig. 6). In the mid-level nutrient treatments, biomass was spread throughout the water column (Fig. 6). In the highest nutrient treatment, algae exhibited a distinct biomass maximum at the surface (Fig. 6). Light was depleted and below I* beneath the surface maximum. Nutrients were in greater concentration at depth.
Algae were present in a distinct surface layer at most times in all of the towers (Fig. 7a–h). However, the surface layer disappeared in low-nutrient treatments by the end of the experiment (Fig. 7a–c). The surface layers in most of the towers (Fig. 7b–d, f, g) show an early peak in biomass where it is higher than the background followed by a decline in surface layer biomass until the end of the experiment. Two of the towers never had a surface layer with more biomass than the background (Fig. 7a, e) and only the highest nutrient tower had more biomass in the surface layer than the background during the last two sampling times of the experiment (Fig. 7h).
Algae were present throughout the water column, without a distinct aggregation at the end of the experiment in low to mid-level nutrient towers (Rin 1⁄4 5–50 lg P/L). The portion of the biomass in the layer, where present, shows an increasing trend with nutrient
treatment (Fig. 8). Although the surface layer was very pronounced when present, only in the highest nutrient treatment was there more biomass in the layer than in the background at the end of the experiment (Fig. 8).
Total biomass averaged over the last 20 days of the experiment was positively related to nutrient supply at low nutrient levels and appeared to saturate (Fig. 9a, P , 0.05), although support for a saturating (piecewise) relationship is equivocal (DAICc , 1) with a significant linear relationship between log biomass and log nutrient supply (not shown, P , 0.05). The depth of the biomass maximum was negatively related to nutrient supply, i.e., deeper under low-nutrient loading and shallower under higher nutrient loading (Fig. 9b, regression not shown, P , 0.05). The biomass maximum was always at the surface for the five highest nutrient supply towers.
Concerning the limiting resource, by day 50, the algae at all depths in the lowest and mid-level nutrient towers were relatively more nutrient limited than the highest nutrient tower as evidenced by the low nutrient levels at all depths (Fig. 10 and note that nutrient axis is on a log scale). The algae at all depths in the highest nutrient tower appear to be primarily limited by light as evidenced by their extremely low light levels at all depths (see also Fig. 5c).
The thickness of the layer (if present) peaked early in the experiment and then decreased until the layer disappeared completely in low to mid-level nutrient towers (Appendix A: Fig. A1a–c), while generally decreasing in the higher nutrient towers (Fig. A1d–h). The light level at the bottom of the water column, Iout, declined through time in all treatments (not shown). At the end of the experiment, Iout was lower in the higher nutrient treatments (Fig. A4) with a significant linear

248 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
 FIG. 7. Amount of biomass in surface layer (if present) and background through time for all eight treatments [panels (a)–(h) present results for lowest to highest nutrients].
relationship between log Iout and log(nutrient treatment) (P , 0.01). At the end of experiment, chlorophyll concentration exhibited subsurface maxima in the three lowest nutrient treatment towers, although the subsurface maxima were not well-defined peaks. Conversely,
the five highest nutrient treatment towers exhibited surface maxima for chlorophyll concentration (Fig. A3a–h). Log(chlorophyll concentration) was positively related to nutrient supply of the experimental treatments (P , 0.001, not shown).

May 2012
COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 249
 Proportion of biomass in the surface layer and the
N:P than the deeper biomass in the higher nutrient treatment towers (different intercepts, P , 0.001, Fig. 11d).
DISCUSSION
We examined how externally imposed heterogeneity and biological self-organization interact to determine phytoplankton spatial distributions and how the spatial distribution and abundance of a species may be driven by feedbacks between resource gradients, behavioral movement, and population dynamics. We have shown how intraspecific competition can drive the vertical distribution of phytoplankton in poorly mixed environments, although the model and experiment disagreed in some aspects.
FIG. 8.
background at the end of the experiment vs. nutrient supply.
Physiology
Physiological data provides additional insight into the resource status of the cells and differences in stoichiometric quantities may indicate why some model predictions were not upheld. Although our model assumes constant physiology, we measured considerable physiological variation in our experiment. To distinguish the effects of nutrients on surface layer vs. deep biomass, we divided the data into surface layer (labeled s in Fig. 11) and deep (d). In the analysis, we focus only on towers with a distinct layer if there is a significantly different slope or intercept between the deep and surface data points. Otherwise, we present the single regression for all data points and treatments.
Chlorophyll concentrations per cell were positively related to nutrient supply of the experimental treatments (P , 0.001, Fig. 11a). Carbon per cell was not related to nutrient supply (results not shown). However, the chlorophyll-to-carbon ratio was positively related to nutrient supply (P , 0.001, results not shown). The cellular content of the non-limiting nutrient nitrogen was not related to nutrient supply (results not shown). Particulate C:N ratio was statistically negatively related to nutrient supply (P , 0.005; Fig. 11b). Although quadratic terms were not significant, the relationship to nutrient supply appears to be more complex than a linear trend. C:N appears to decline at high nutrient levels, but exhibits a high variance at intermediate nutrient supply.
Phosphorus quota was positively related to nutrient supply across all towers (P , 0.001, results not shown) and in towers where surface peaks occurred (highnutrient supply towers), nutrient supply had a larger effect on deep biomass (different slopes, P , 0.001, results not shown). Particulate C:P ratio was also negatively related to nutrient supply across all towers (P , 0.005, results not shown) and the surface biomass had a higher C:P than the deeper biomass in the higher nutrient treatment towers (different intercepts, P , 0.001, Fig. 11c). Particulate N:P ratio was negatively related to nutrient supply across all towers (P , 0.001, results not shown) and the surface biomass had a higher
Effect of nutrient treatment on equilibrium biomass
 FIG. 9.
and depth distribution. (a) Observed integrated biomass (measured as hundreds of cells/cm2) averaged over days 30– 50 as a function of nutrient treatment. Shown is the significant piecewise linear relationship between log(biomass) and log(nutrient supply) (slope 1⁄4 0.5, t 1⁄4 2.68, P , 0.05; switch point for the piecewise relationship 1⁄4 log[148], t 1⁄4 5.26, P , 0.05), and not shown is the significant linear relationship between log(biomass) and log(nutrient supply) (slope 1⁄4 0.26, t 1⁄4 2.77, P , 0.05). Note that support for both models is equivocal as measured by the change in the Akaike information criterion for small sample sizes (DAICc). (b) Observed modal depths for days 30–50 as a function of nutrient treatment. Not shown is the significant linear relationship between modal depth and log(nutrient supply) (slope 1⁄4 0.14, t 1⁄4 2.90, P , 0.05). Note that points for the nutrient treatments of 5, 10, and 50 lg P/L have been offset 0.025 m for clarity, while the points for nutrient treatments of 100, 250, 500, 1000, 5000 lg P/L all fall directly on top of one another and have not been offset.

250 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
 Other studies have shown how particular processes may influence vertical distributions. Carney et al. (1988) showed with field studies how interspecific resource competition for nutrients and light can structure vertical distributions of phytoplankton. Several studies have used experimental water columns to examine other processes that have been hypothesized to explain the vertical distribution of phytoplankton such as diel vertical migrations (Arvola et al. 1991), sedimentation losses (Pannard et al. 2007), and mixing (Jaeger et al. 2008b). These studies are instrumental in understanding the particular role of certain other factors in explaining vertical distributions of phytoplankton. We built on this prior work by focusing on a hypothesis that has recently been explored theoretically and makes specific testable predictions.
Our goal was to test model predictions of how competition determines the vertical distribution of phytoplankton. We focused on qualitative patterns due to uncertainty in several of the model parameters. The first prediction we considered was that algae will form a thin layer (Klausmeier and Litchman 2001). This prediction was supported for the surface layer case, as in high-nutrient treatments, we observed surface aggregations (Fig. 7). Additionally, algae were aggregated in a thin surface layer in most treatments over the whole duration of the experiment and in low and mid-level nutrient treatments over most of the duration of the experiment. However, the prediction that algae will form a thin layer was not supported for the DCM or benthic layer case.
The second prediction was that the depth of the thin layer should be deeper under low-nutrient conditions and shallower under high-nutrient conditions. Support for this prediction was mixed (Fig. 9b), as the equilibrium depths of the biomass maxima were deeper in the low-nutrient treatments than the high-nutrient treatments. The five highest nutrient treatments all had surface biomass maxima, but, in the three lowest nutrient treatments, there was no clear relationship
FIG. 10. Data points are observed resource conditions within different water columns at different depths. Resource conditions for a lownutrient supply tower (open circles), mid-level nutrient supply tower (gray donuts), and highnutrient supply tower (solid circles, some on top of one another) are shown corresponding to nutrient treatments Rin 1⁄4 5, 50, and 5000 lg P/L, respectively. Since light declines with depth, the data point with the highest light value for each tower is also the shallowest depth. Note that the arrows point out the different treatments corresponding to the depth distributions in Fig. 5. The lines are zero net growth isoclines (ZNGIs) corresponding to estimated I* and R* values.
between equilibrium depth of the biomass maximum and nutrient supply.
The third prediction was that over a range of nutrient concentrations where light limitation does not occur, the total biomass should be positively associated with nutrient concentrations at the bottom of the water column. This prediction was supported (Fig. 9a), as equilibrium total biomass increased with nutrient concentrations and appeared to saturate at the highest nutrient concentrations, which may indicate a switch to light limitation. While it may seem obvious that more biomass should grow at higher nutrient levels, nutrient inputs and algal biomass were frequently spatially segregated in our experimental water columns.
The fourth prediction was that a surface layer should occur under high-nutrient supply conditions and be coor light-limited, a benthic layer should occur under low nutrient supply conditions and be nutrient limited, and a DCM should occur under mid-level nutrient supply conditions and be co-limited. This prediction was somewhat supported (Fig. 10). In the lowest nutrient tower, algae at all depths appear to be primarily limited by nutrients because nutrient concentrations are low and light levels high throughout the water column (note the log scale of the nutrient axis in Fig. 10). Conversely, algae in the highest nutrient tower appear to be light limited. In Fig. 5, biomass maxima were near the bottom in the lowest nutrient treatment and at the surface in the highest nutrient treatment, so we see some support for our model-driven hypotheses. The towers appear to be arrayed along a nutrient-limited to light-limited gradient but none are exactly at the point of co-limitation predicted by ESS theory for a DCM, which we did not observe in this study.
What limited growth overall? Biomass in all treatments levels off or decreases by the end of the experiment (Fig. 7). At the whole-tower scale, the three lowest nutrient treatments appear to be nutrient-limited, as they exist along the increasing biomass with nutrient supply part of the regression (Fig. 9a). However the higher nutrient treatments appear not to be nutrient

May 2012 COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 251
 FIG. 11. Chlorophyll a, nutrient, and stoichiometric quantities at the end of the experiment as a function of nutrient supply (note log scale). Only significant relations are shown; if the ANCOVA was significant for a variable, those results are shown rather than the linear regression results for all treatments. Panels (a) and (b) show the regression lines from all treatments and sampling depths. Panels (c) and (d) show the regression lines from ANCOVAs conducted only on treatments with a surface layer present at the end of the experiment. The solid line is for the deep data points (d) and the dashed line is for the surface data points (s). (a) Chlorophyll a per cell is positively related to nutrient treatment (N 1⁄4 60, slope 1⁄4 3.77 3 10􏰀7, t 1⁄4 11.21, P , 0.001, as is chlorophyll, not shown, N 1⁄4 60, slope 1⁄4 1.34, t 1⁄4 9.25, P , 0.001). (b) C:N ratio of particulate matter is negatively related to log nutrient treatment (N 1⁄4 60, slope 1⁄4 􏰀0.69, t 1⁄4 􏰀3.01, P , 0.005). (c) C:P ratio of particulate matter is negatively related to log nutrient treatment, but the intercept differs between the deep data points (N 1⁄4 33, intercept 1⁄4 1575.76, t 1⁄4 12.717, P , 0.001) and surface data points (N 1⁄4 4, intercept 1⁄4 1957.06, t 1⁄4 17.874, P , 0.001). (d) N:P ratio of particulate matter is negatively related to nutrient treatment but the intercept differs between the deep (N 1⁄4 33, intercept 1⁄4 145.50, t 1⁄4 20.53, P , 0.001) and surface data points (N 1⁄4 4, intercept 1⁄4 164.91, t 1⁄4 25.117, P , 0.001).
limited. In addition, algae moved down in the lowest nutrient treatments (Fig. 5), presumably to acquire more nutrients because they were nutrient limited.
At the local level, light was limiting in high-nutrient treatments based on vertical distributions of biomass across towers and light levels below break-even levels toward the bottom (Appendix: Fig. A4). However, this theoretical I* value is derived from parameters that have large confidence intervals (e.g., light half-saturation constant, KI) and uncertainty in their estimate (e.g., mortality, m) and assume constant physiology (Table 1). Mortality was at least equal to the dilution rate (the amount of media we withdrew to sample relative to the total volume of media in a tower), however, mortality could be at least the levels commonly assumed in the literature (0.1 d􏰀1) but this is a difficult parameter to measure (Crumpton and Wetzel 1982). In addition, mortality likely changed over the course of the
experiment, as the biomass in most of the towers eventually declined. The cause of this mortality is unknown but can be a common phenomenon in experiments (Fogg and Thake 1987).
By considering surface vs. deep biomass, further evidence comes to light on what limits growth locally. In the low-nutrient treatments, there is no surface biomass (Fig. 8). However, background biomass increases with nutrient supply since total biomass increases with nutrient supply (Fig. 9a). Thus, the background biomass was nutrientor co-limited. In the higher nutrient treatments, biomass exists in the surface layer and background. The surface layer biomass is likely nutrientor co-limited since the proportion in the surface layer appears to increase with nutrient supply (Fig. 8). The background biomass is likely lightor colimited since the proportion in the background appears to decrease with nutrient supply.

252 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
Klausmeier and Litchman (2001) also make other predictions regarding the resource conditions within the water column for a DCM. They predict that nutrients should be at the break-even level, R*, above the thin layer and linearly increase below it and that light immediately below the thin layer should be at the breakeven level I*. While direct support for this prediction is equivocal because we never observed a well-defined DCM, light immediately below the surface layer was below I* for the highest nutrient treatment (Fig. 5c). As Fig. A4 shows, light levels at the bottom were below I* in the high-nutrient towers.
Some results not related to previous predictions may be unanticipated. In Fig. 7, the biomass in the surface layer was greater than the background in some towers but these towers are not all high-nutrient towers as one might expect, nor are they all low-nutrient towers. Furthermore, those towers that had higher biomass in the surface layer than the background reached that transition at different times in the experiment. In the lower nutrient towers (Fig. 7b–d), the transition to high surface layer biomass happened around day 4; in higher nutrient towers, this transition occurred around day 12 (Fig. 7f and g); and in the highest nutrient tower, it did not occur until day 45 (Fig. 7h).
Interestingly, the proportion of biomass in the surface layer is positively related to nutrient treatment (Fig. 8). This could be due to the greater amount of biomass having a stronger effect on the resource environment and therefore creating a sharper fitness gradient. All towers showed a spike in layer thickness early in the experiment before generally thinning (Fig. A1). It is interesting that layers concentrated before they disappeared in the lower nutrient towers (Fig. A1a–c), rather than thickening due to the population spreading out because the layer location has depleted resources. Consistently, the thinnest layer occurred in the highest nutrient tower, perhaps because the light gradient was so sharp in that tower that algae were tightly packed in the layer in an attempt to get enough light to persist (Fig. A1h).
At the beginning of the experiment, we imposed strong vertical heterogeneity. Nevertheless, algae could live and grow at any location in every tower, i.e., this species had a very large fundamental niche. However, through growth, aggregation, and intraspecific competition by depletion of resources, algae reduced the locations where they could grow in each tower, i.e., they created a realized niche confined in space (for example Fig. 5c). These niche construction processes shape the environment for future generations of the algae in each tower (Laland et al. 1999, Hastings et al. 2007).
Hypothesized reasons for lack of model and experiment agreement
Overall, there is mixed agreement between predictions from the full dynamic model and experimental results (compare Figs. 1–3 with Figs. 5, 9, and 10). Surface
layers formed under predicted nutrient replete conditions and appeared to be relatively more light limited. However, our prediction of subsurface layer formation (DCM or benthic layer) was not verified by the experiment.
There are several potential reasons we never observed a well-defined subsurface layer (i.e., a DCM): (1) Algae could not detect the resource gradients sufficiently to respond. We expect this kind of layer to form at low to mid-level nutrient supply. Under these conditions, algae quickly consume these nutrients and once the surface is no longer the best place in the water column, they move down. However, the nutrient gradient is small and may not be detectable to the algae at this point. The algae are then left to wander on a fitness landscape that is relatively flat. There is some field evidence that the genus we chose for our experiments, Chlamydomonas, does not always show distinct vertical distributions even when other genera in the water column do (Spaulding et al. 1994). (2) Because the range of nutrient levels over which we predict a DCM to be the equilibrium strategy is narrow (Fig. 3b), we may have missed that range in parameter space with our treatments. However, that does not explain why we did not observe a well-defined benthic layer. (3) Algae actively migrated on a diurnal cycle or at random, as predicted to be a good strategy in opposing resource gradients (Cullen and MacIntyre 1998). Given the condensed vertical extent of our water columns, cells could easily migrate from top to bottom in one day. (4) Algae adjusted their light-harvesting machinery with depth instead of moving to different light conditions. Cellular chlorophyll content varied with depth in the towers (Fig. 11a). However, for towers where a surface layer was present, there is no significant difference between the chlorophyll per cell in the surface layer and deep algae. (5) Nutrients were not continuously supplied into the towers, rather, they were injected at the bottom in 10 discrete events. When we ran simulations (Appendix: Fig. A5) with temporally varying nutrient inputs that correspond to our injections in the experiment, algae had a more uniform distribution before a nutrient pulse in low and mid-level nutrients. Interestingly, taking these discrete injections into account may also explain the decline in total biomass in the second half of the experiment.
The Pe ́ clet number Pe 1⁄4 vzb/D, which gives the ratio between timescales of swimming and eddy diffusion (Condie 1999), provides insight whether the algae tend to aggregate in a layer (Pe 􏰤 1) or to distribute homogeneously (Pe 􏰣 1) in the water column. If we set v 1⁄4 vmax and apply values in Table 1, we have Pe 1⁄4 15, which indicates distinct aggregation can occur. While this supposition agrees with our observations of surface algal layers in high-nutrient treatments, we did not observe distinct vertical aggregation in lower-nutrient treatments. In these treatments, either actual v may be lower than vmax or effective D may be greater due to random vertical movement of the algae possibly because

May 2012 COMPETITION FOR NUTRIENTS AND LIGHT 253
 PLATE 1. Several plankton towers used in experiment. Note that towers were covered by black sheeting during experiment. Photo credit: J. P. Mellard.
vertical nutrient gradients were not strong enough. As a result, Pe may be lower than the estimate (J. Grover, personal communication).
Physiology and stoichiometry
The models we employed assume constant stoichiometry. However, the physiological and stoichiometry data indicate differences in cellular pigments and nutrients between treatments and in some cases, with depth. The chlorophyll a per cell was higher in higher nutrient towers (Fig. 11a), which may support the prediction that light competition is important under high-nutrient conditions, leading cells to produce more chlorophyll. The chlorophyll a : carbon ratio was also higher in higher nutrient towers, which also supports this prediction. Our values of 0.001–0.019 are within range of chlorophyll : C reported by others in the field and lab (Sharp et al. 1980, Eppley et al. 1988, Fennel and Boss 2003).
The C:N decrease with increasing nutrient supply (Fig. 11b) is somewhat puzzling given that neither particulate carbon per cell nor particulate nitrogen per cell was related to nutrient supply. However, the relationship is weak (R2 1⁄4 0.12) and the C:N may be driven by the higher chlorophyll per cell in higher nutrient towers because chlorophyll is known to have a significant nitrogen component (Sterner and Elser 2002). The high variance in C:N at intermediate nutrient supplies suggests that those towers may have a type of colimitation of lightand nutrient-limited individuals in the population that increases physiological variability. Cellular phosphorus quota was greater in the deeper
portion of the water column than the surface for higher nutrient treatments, consistent with the cells deeper in the water column being nutrient rich. The C:P and the N:P ratios were greater in the surface and declined with increasing nutrient supply for the high-nutrient treatments (Fig. 11c and d). Increasing phosphorus supply could decrease these ratios because cells have more phosphorus while carbon per cell and nitrogen per cell were not related to nutrient treatment.
Our physiological and stoichiometric data shows that chlorophyll per cell varies across nutrient treatments and phosphorus quota varies across nutrient treatments and with depth. This complexity should be incorporated in future models. Models that consider the dynamics of both chlorophyll and biomass with depth have been developed (Fennel and Boss 2003) but their predictions should be explored across large environmental gradients, such as gradients in nutrient loading. Models with variable stoichiometry (Grover 2009, Jaeger et al. 2010) have just scratched the surface of possible ramifications for spatial distributions. Our experimental results indicate that more attention should be given to this area. However, modeling variable stoichiometry in space can be challenging and we will have to rely on increasingly complex model development (Grover 2009).
Implications and future work
Although our experimental water columns are not a perfect replica of a lake or other body of water, our results have implications for field data. We have shown that, at least for surface layers, layer formation can be driven by plentiful nutrient supply with motile algae

254 JARAD P. MELLARD ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 82, No. 2
moving to locations where conditions are best for growth. We have shown that this is due to the relative importance of nutrients and light under different nutrient supplies and the influence of the algal population itself, through nutrient uptake and self-shading. These results illustrate the plausibility of a mechanism for surface bloom formation in bodies of water when nutrients are supplied only from below: blooms can occur from nutrients mixing from the bottom rather than surface runoff or direct addition to the epilimnion. A surface bloom is the best strategy under some conditions due to asymmetric competition for light.
Our experimental towers were designed to isolate one aspect of the ecosystem and may have limitations for describing processes in whole aquatic ecosystems (Carpenter 1996). For example, our towers may not be representative of water columns in lakes because of their dimensions. Although we attempted to scale down the physics (depth, light) in the experiment and model using dimensional analysis, the organisms were not scaled down. This means that even if mixing was reduced so that the 1.5-m towers can mimic a 15-m water column, the biology of the organism in the tower is unchanged (vmax) and so the height of our towers (zb) could be too short to represent the resource gradients that span many meters in water columns of lakes, which often have a larger D. Depending on whether zb or D increases more quickly across lakes, in order to keep the same Pe could require either a higher or lower v. Therefore, our results do not preclude competition in opposing nutrient and light gradients from causing clearly defined DCMs in real water columns of lakes. Field experiments are needed for further examination of these processes.
Our theoretical approach may be useful when an essential substance for growth is unidirectional in space and organisms can occupy a part of the space. In such situations, other essential substances should be consumed from the upper end of the imposed gradient, which will cause opposing gradients to form. Some opposing gradients exist naturally; others are created due to the requirements and impacts of organisms. Phytoplankton in a water column is an obvious example. In sediments, gradients of organic matter, water, and oxygen are typically unidirectional vertically. Therefore, microbes in sediments may also be playing a game in opposing resource gradients.
More tests of spatially explicit models similar to ours should be conducted, in particular, more experiments should be conducted to test recent theory on stratified water columns and multiple species competition. For example, inclusion of spatially varying mixing can test theoretical predictions of the vertical distribution of phytoplankton in stratified water columns (Mellard et al. 2011). Experiments with multiple species can test theoretical predictions of interspecific competition for nutrients and light in spatially complex environments (Huisman et al. 2006, Yoshiyama et al. 2009). Although some studies have considered zooplankton depth distri-
butions in relation to algae (Johnsen and Jakobsen 1987, Leibold 1990, Williamson et al. 1996, Lampert et al. 2003), more theory and experiments should be conducted on the games between phytoplankton and zooplankton that consider both to have flexible depth and migration-behavioral strategies. For testing game-theoretic models, the advantage of using plankton is also a disadvantage, that is, their small size and continuous growth and movement also prevents tracking and manipulation of discrete individuals.
In conclusion, our experiment offers mixed support for our conceptual and mathematical models for spatial distributions of phytoplankton. We have shown that phytoplankton exhibit a fast behavioral response to resource gradients. Phytoplankton grow at the depth they have selected, developing strong aggregations, and creating a niche in resource space through impacts on their environment. Phytoplankton may then modify their behavioral strategies as a consequence of these feedbacks and the strategies of the other phytoplankton cells in the water column. Observed vertical distributions of phytoplankton in lakes and oceans may be the result of this game played in resource space.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pam Woodruff, Darice Shumway, and Ally Hutchens for help with this experiment. We also thank Kelly Amrhein, Paula Tezanos, Chris Steiner, Anne Schwaderer, Claes Becker, and Jay Lennon for contributing in discussions, and Jason Cepela, Emily Grman, Todd Robinson, Jim Grover, and several anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript.
This work was in part supported by funding from National Science Foundation Division of Environmental Biology 0610531 and 06-10532 and the J. S. McDonnell Foundation. K. Yoshiyama was partially supported by the Global Environmental Research Fund (Fa-084) by the Ministry of the Environment, Japan. This is contribution number 1603 of the W. K. Kellogg Biological Station.
LITERATURE CITED
