Molecular Ecology (2009) 18, 2365–2374 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04195.x
Interpopulation variation in mating system and late-stage inbreeding depression in Magnolia stellata
ICHIRO TAMAKI,* KIYOSHI ISHIDA,† SUZUKI SETSUKO* and NOBUHIRO TOMARU*
*Laboratory of Forest Ecology and Physiology, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan, †Faculty of Agriculture and Life Science, Hirosaki University, Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8561, Japan
Abstract
Inbreeding has the potential to cause evolutionary changes in populations, although these changes are likely to drive populations to extinction through inbreeding depression and reductions in genetic diversity. We investigated the mating system and late-stage inbreeding depression (δ) in 10 populations of Magnolia stellata using nine microsatellite markers and evaluated the effects of population size and the degree of population isolation through inbreeding and inbreeding depression on the persistence of populations. The outcrossing rates were very similar (~0.7) among populations, but the correlations of paternity, fractions of biparental inbreeding and inbreeding coefficients at the seed stage (FS) varied among populations, suggesting that the level of outcrossing was similar among populations, while the quality of it was not. A significant negative correlation was detected between FS and population size. The average value of δ was 0.709, and the values in six of the 10 populations were significant. The values of δ differed among populations, although clear relationships with population size and the degree of population isolation were not detected. However, in one population, which was very small and located in the edge of the species’ range, we obtained a very low value of δ (–0.096), which may be indicative of purging or the fixation of deleterious alleles. Existing M. stellata populations that are small (and thus might be expected to have higher frequencies of inbreeding) and have large values of δ may be in danger of declining, even if the populations are located within the central region of the species’ range.
Keywords: biparentalinbreeding,conservation,correlationofpaternity,inbreedingcoefficient,outcrossing rate
Received 12 December 2008; revision received 9 March 2009; accepted 17 March 2009
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Introduction
Inbreeding has the potential to cause evolutionary changes in populations (Lande & Schemske 1985; Charlesworth & Charlesworth 1987; Goodwillie et al. 2005), although these changes are likely to drive populations to extinction through inbreeding depression and reductions in genetic diversity (Frankham et al. 2002; Frankham 2005). Inbreeding is more likely to occur in small populations and in populations that are either isolated or at the edge of their distribution range (Young et al. 1996; Routley et al. 1999; Keller & Waller 2002; Robledo-Arnuncio 2004; Hodgins & Barrett 2006; Michalski & Durka 2007; Aguilar et al. 2008). In order to understand
Correspondence: Ichiro Tamaki, Fax: +81-052-789-5014; E-mail: garageit@gmail.com
the effects of inbreeding for any particular species, it is important to investigate its mating system in multiple populations across its range, particularly with respect to population size and the degree of population isolation. However, few studies have examined mating systems of populations across an entire species’ range (but see Neel et al. 2001; Ledig et al. 2005; Yates et al. 2007) because such studies are logistically challenging and expensive.
Inbreeding depression is one of the major effects brought by inbreeding and has attracted the attention of many botanists from Darwin (1876) onwards. Many theoretical studies have considered the relationship between inbreeding and inbreeding depression (Charlesworth & Charlesworth 1987, 1999; Dudash & Carr 1998; Byers & Waller 1999). Inbreeding depression occurs through the homozygote expression of deleterious recessive alleles that are generally masked in
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

2366 I. TAMAKI ET AL.
heterozygotes and maintained at low frequencies in populations. In populations where inbreeding frequently occurs, the deleterious recessive alleles are removed from the populations by the selection against homozygotes of them and, then, the magnitude of inbreeding depression has become weak, and this phenomenon is called ‘purging’ (Charlesworth et al. 1990; Hedrick 1994; Byers & Waller 1999). The efficiency of purging strongly depends on the distribution of deleterious effects of the recessive alleles. Lethal or semi-lethal alleles are promptly removed from the population, while weakly deleterious alleles are hard to be removed. The magnitude of inbreeding depression may have been maintained in the normal populations, but not in the small or isolated populations. Further, Husband & Schemske (1996) reported that the magnitude of inbreeding depression varies among life stages in plants. Measuring inbreeding depression through all life stages from gametes to adults usually demands considerable time and financial resources. Thus, in this study, we primarily focus on late-stage inbreeding depression, which acts on plants in the life stages from seeds to adults, since it can be relatively easily estimated by comparing inbreeding coefficients of seeds and adults (Ritland 1990). This indirect approach also allows the magnitude of inbreeding depression to be conveniently compared among populations. Hence, in several evolutionary and ecological studies, levels of late-stage inbreeding depression have been estimated using this method (Keller & Waller 2002; Hodgins & Barrett 2006; Jokela et al. 2006; Edmands 2007; Kubota et al. 2008).
To elucidate the effects of late-stage inbreeding depression on the persistence of populations, the degree of inbreeding must be considered at the same time, because if there is no severe inbreeding in a population, inbreeding depression would not be a problem, even if the population contains many deleterious alleles. Here, therefore, we estimated the overall effects of inbreeding and inbreeding depression in each of the investigated populations by multiplying empirically determined inbreeding and inbreeding depression parameters to estimate the fractions of naturally pollinated seeds killed by inbreeding depression as plants progressed from seeds to adults. These fractions may be strongly related to the probability of populations of rare species successfully regenerating from naturally pollinated seeds (and hence, their persistence).
In order to conserve rare species, it is important to understand the effects of population size and the degree of population isolation on inbreeding and inbreeding depression in their populations. Frequency of inbreeding is generally increased in small or isolated populations. However, relationships between inbreeding depression and population size or population isolation may not be straightforward due to the process of purging. The objectives of this study are: (i) to investigate the mating system (outcrossing rates, correlations of paternity, degrees of biparental inbreeding and
inbreeding coefficients), late-stage inbreeding depression and the overall effects of inbreeding and inbreeding depression on the survival of plants from seed to adult stages (expressed as the fraction of naturally pollinated seeds killed by inbreeding depression) in 10 populations of Magnolia stellata across its range; and (ii) to evaluate the effects of population size and the degree of population isolation through inbreeding and inbreeding depression on the persistence of M. stellata populations.
Materials and methods
Study organism and sampling
Magnolia stellata (Sieb. et Zucc.) Maxim. is a deciduous broadleaved tree found in Japan. It is favoured as a garden plant not only in Japan, but also in North America and Europe, where it is known as star magnolia (Callaway 1994). It grows in marshland and along the banks of streams in warm temperate forests, and can reach 10 m in height and 20 cm in diameter at breast height. The natural distribution of this species is limited to the Tokai region of central Japan (Fig. 1). The populations distributed in the Atsumi Peninsula, Aichi Prefecture, and in Mie Prefecture have probably suffered from severe effects of geographical isolation and small population size in recent years (Japan Association for Shidekobushi Conservation 1996). This species is now considered as ‘near threatened’ (NT) and is on the Japanese red list (Ministry of the Environment Government of Japan 2007). M. stellata has a mixed mating system and its self-compatible hermaphrodite flowers are protogynous. Autogamous selfing cannot occur (Saeda et al. 2004), but geitonogamous selfing can occur due to asynchronous flowering within a single tree (Setsuko et al. 2008). Its pollen is mainly carried by small insects (rove beetles and thrips) (Setsuko et al. 2008). Fruits are aggregated and contain between 1 and about 40 seeds per fruit. The number of seeds within fruits varies within and among individual trees (Tamaki et al. 2009). Its seeds are dispersed by gravity (Setsuko et al. 2004) and/or birds (T. Kimura, unpublished).
Hirayama et al. (2007) examined the outcrossing rate, inbreeding depression, pollen shortage and seed production in two M. stellata populations: one of small size and the other large. These authors found that the degree of early-stage inbreeding depression, which acts on the gamete to seed life stages, was lower in the small population than in the large one. Another previous study by Tamaki et al. (2008) examined genetic variation in M. stellata across its range and showed that the levels of within-population genetic variation were influenced by the size and degree of isolation of the populations, and that the inbreeding coefficient varied among populations. Thus, the degree of inbreeding and inbreeding depression may differ among M. stellata populations because the degree of inbreeding depression depends on the
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

heterozygosity of deleterious alleles, their degree of dominance and the inbreeding coefficient (Falconer & Mackay 1996; Frankham et al. 2002).
In the study presented here, 10 study populations were selected across the species’ range and 10 to 19 maternal trees were randomly selected in each population (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Leaves of maternal trees and their seeds were collected in 2005 (only for the Yatogawa population) and 2007 (for all other populations). Tamaki et al. (2009) examined outcrossing rates at hierarchical levels of fruits, individuals, populations and species in five populations of M. stellata and showed that outcrossing rates are likely to vary among individuals within populations or among fruits within individuals, rather than among populations. In the present study, we were interested in the outcrossing rates at the population level rather than the fruit level. Thus, only one seed was randomly collected from individual fruits in order to avoid pseudoreplication of seeds within fruits. We only analysed materials from maternal trees from which more than two seeds could be collected. The total numbers of maternal trees and seeds sampled were 142 and 1216,
Table 1 Population name, code and size, number of samples, latestage inbreeding depression (δ) and the fraction of naturally pollinated seeds killed by inbreeding depression from seeds to adults (D) in the 10 sampled Magnolia stellata populations
INBREEDING DEPRESSION IN MAGNOLIA STELLATA 2367
Fig.1 Locationsofthe10sampledMagnolia stellata populations (black dots) and the species’ range (grey areas). Populations are represented by the codes listed in Table 1.
  Population
Name
Hoshigami Okute Izumi Kokeizan Kakishita Sue Yatogawa Toshichibara Asahidani Tabika Average
Code Size*
Hos 257 Oku 69 Izu 70 Kok 339 Kak 54 Sue 156 Yat 77 Tos 130 Asa 29 Tab 51
No. of samples
Maternal
tree Seed
19 159
11 99
14 97
16 142
10 64
18 171
10 106
15 139
13 74
16 165
14.2 121.6 0.709
D
0.393 0.272 0.481 0.172 0.492 0.280 0.477 0.348 0.000 0.388 0.330
  © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
*Population sizes are the numbers of reproductive individuals in the populations, as reported by Tamaki et al. (2008).
δ
 0.857 0.654 1.162 0.411 0.850 0.523 1.029 0.827
–0.096 0.888
 
2368 I. TAMAKI ET AL.
respectively, and the average numbers ± standard deviations of sampled maternal trees per population, seeds per population and seeds per maternal tree were 14.2 ± 3.2, 121.6 ± 38.6 and 8.6 ± 2.6, respectively (Table 1). The leaves and seeds were stored at –20 °C and 4 °C, respectively, until DNA extraction.
DNA extraction and microsatellite analysis
Genomic DNA was extracted from the sampled leaves, and from the embryos and endosperms in the seeds, using the hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide method (Murray & Thompson 1980) with minor modifications. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification was performed for nine microsatellite markers: eight (stm0148, stm0184, stm0214, stm0222, stm0225, stm0251, stm0428 and stm0448) developed for M. stellata (Setsuko et al. 2005), and one (M6D8) developed for Magnolia obovata (Isagi et al. 1999), using Multiplex PCR Kit (QIAGEN). PCR fragments were separated using a 3100 Avant Genetic Analyzer in conjunction with GeneScan software (Applied Biosystems), and the genotypes of each sample were determined at the nine loci.
Data analysis
Multilocus genotypes of the seeds were compared with those of their maternal trees to determine whether the seeds were produced by outcrossing or selfing. Outcrossing rates at the population and individual levels and their variance components among populations and among individuals within populations, respectively, were then estimated using the hierarchical Bayesian model described by Tamaki et al. (2009) with the program WinBUGS 1.4.3 (Spiegelhalter et al. 2003), assisted by the R2WinBUGS package in the program r 2.7.2 (Sturtz et al. 2005; r Development Core Team 2008). Statistical support for the variance components was confirmed by the deviance information criterion (DIC). This model enables us to estimate outcrossing rates at the individual and population levels simultaneously based on the hierarchical structure of data with reasonable statistical uncertainty (see detail in Tamaki et al. 2009). The values of correlation of paternity (rp), two different measures of biparental inbreeding (tm – ts and 1 – rs; where tm is the multilocus outcrossing rate, ts is the single-locus outcrossing rate, and rs is the correlation of selfing among loci), and corresponding 95% bootstrap confidence intervals based on 1000 resamplings of the data for maternal trees, were estimated for each population by the EM algorithm in MLTR 3.3 (Ritland 2002). When estimating seed-stage inbreeding coefficient (FS) from the allele frequency data of seeds, since we used multiple seeds from the same maternal trees (8.6 seeds per maternal trees) to estimate FS, the specific family structures among seeds within maternal trees could have increased the values of FS due to the Wahlund effect (Goossens et al. 2001). Therefore, in order
to remove the effects of family structure from the estimation of FS, we conducted 1000 simulations in which only one seed was randomly drawn from each family and the value of inbreeding coefficient was calculated at each locus and over all loci using the data set of randomly drawn seed genotypes. FS was then estimated averaging the values of inbreeding coefficient from the 1000 simulations, and corresponding 95% bootstrap confidence intervals were estimated based on 1000 resamplings of the values for loci in each population.
Comparisons between the inbreeding coefficient for the seed and adult stages allowed us to estimate the effect of inbreeding depression on the survival of plants from seeds to adults (δ, late-stage inbreeding depression; Ritland 1990), using the following equation, derived from the equation 3 presented in Ritland (1990), by substituting 2 FS/(1 + FS) and FA for s and F, respectively:
δ=1–[(1–FS)FA/FS (1–FA)],
where FA denotes the adult-stage inbreeding coefficient, which was estimated for each population based on the genotypes of 29–77 sampled adult tree determined at 10 microsatellite loci (Tamaki et al. 2008). Note that the value of δ is not equivalent to the magnitude of inbreeding depression due to selfing (e.g. δ denoted by Johnston & Schoen 1994) in some cases, since FS and FA are inbreeding coefficients that reflect not only selfing but also biparental inbreeding. Thus, if the fraction of biparental inbreeding is large at the adult stage, this equation can underestimate inbreeding depression due to selfing. To quantify the overall effects of selfing, biparental inbreeding and inbreeding depression on the survival from seed to adult stages, the fraction of naturally pollinated seeds killed by inbreeding depression (D) was calculated using the following equation:
D = 1 – (relative survival rates of offspring)
= 1 – (weighted mean of relative survival rates for offspring
resulting from three different matings: outcrossing, biparental
inbreeding and selfing)
= 1 – [t(1 – b) + tb(1 – δ) + (1 – t)(1 – δ)],
where t and b are the outcrossing rates at the population level estimated by the hierarchical Bayesian model and the fraction of biparental inbreeding, respectively. We used 1 – rs as an estimate of b because tm – ts depends upon the number of loci used (Ritland 2002) and the values of tm – ts were always lower than those of 1 – rs in our data set, and thus, tm – ts may underestimate the fraction of biparental inbreeding. When the values of δ were lower than 0 or higher than 1, the values of 0 or 1 were used in the calculation of D, respectively. In the above equation, the magnitude of late-stage inbreeding depression for offspring produced by biparental inbreeding was assumed to be equal to that for offspring produced by selfing. Since the degree of inbreeding depression for offspring produced by biparental inbreeding is expected to be
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

INBREEDING DEPRESSION IN MAGNOLIA STELLATA 2369
Fig. 2 Outcrossing rates (t) (a), correlation of paternity (rp) (b) and degrees of biparental inbreeding (tm – ts and 1 – rs) (c and d) in the 10 Magnolia stellata populations. Dots and bars represent posterior mean values and their 95% credible intervals (a) or values calculated using the original data set and corresponding 95% bootstrap confidence intervals based on 1000 resamplings of data for maternal trees (b, c and d), respectively.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            at most equal to that for offspring produced by selfing, the relative survival rate of offspring produced by biparental inbreeding denoted by the term ‘tb(1 – δ)’ in the above equation may overestimate the effects of biparental inbreeding.
To elucidate the relationships of inbreeding, inbreeding depression and their overall effects on the survival of seeds to adults stages with population size and the degree of population isolation, we calculated Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients (r) for FS, δ and D with the number of reproductive individuals in populations (population size) and the number of surrounding populations within a radius of 0.5 km around the focal population (the degree of population isolation). In a previous population genetic study of M. stellata, the level of genetic variation within populations was found to be strongly correlated with population size and the degree of population isolation (Tamaki et al. 2008).
Results
Interpopulation variation in mating system
The posterior mean values of outcrossing rates at the population level ranged from 0.621 to 0.711 and their 95% credible intervals among populations overlapped (Fig. 2a). In every
population, there were some pairs of individuals between which the 95% credible intervals of outcrossing rates did not overlap (Fig. 3). The variance component of outcrossing rates among individual trees within populations (posterior mean, 1.487; 95% credible interval, 0.942–2.258) was significantly higher than among populations (0.092, 0.001–0.432). The values of DIC for the full model, and for the models in which hierarchical components of individual trees and populations were excluded, were 534.9, 700.7 and 528.7, respectively. These DIC values show that the variance component is statistically supported at the individual tree level, but not at the population level. The correlation of paternity (rp) ranged from 0.018 to 0.613 and the 95% confidence intervals did not overlap between some population pairs (Fig. 2b). The Asahidani population had the highest value of rp among all populations. The values of tm – ts and 1 – rs, both of which are measures of the degree of biparental inbreeding, ranged from 0.045 to 0.219 and 0.058 to 0.374, respectively, and for every population the former parameter was always lower than the latter (Fig. 2c, d). The 95% confidence intervals of these two measures of biparental inbreeding did not overlap for some population pairs. Three populations (Kakishita, Sue and Yatogawa) showed a high degree of biparental inbreeding. The values of tm – ts in two populations, Okute and Asahidani,
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 2370 I. TAMAKI ET AL.
Fig. 3 Outcrossing rates at the individual level in the 10 Magnolia stellata populations. Population names are indicated above each graph, while individuals are designated by their ID below each graph. Dots and bars represent posterior mean values and their 95% credible intervals, respectively.
were not significantly different from zero. The values of the inbreeding coefficient in populations at the seed stage (FS) ranged from 0.141 to 0.340; in all cases, these coefficients were significantly greater than zero, and their 95% confidence intervals did not overlap between some population pairs (Fig. 4). The value of FS was significantly correlated with population size (r = –0.661, P < 0.05; Fig. 5a), but not with the degree of population isolation (r = 0.240, P = 0.501; Fig. 5b).
Interpopulation variation in late-stage inbreeding depression
The values of late-stage inbreeding depression (δ) in the populations ranged from –0.096 to 1.162, with an average
of 0.709 (Table 1). No significant correlations between δ and either population size or the degree of population isolation were detected (r = –0.067 and 0.538, P = 0.865 and 0.109; Fig. 5c and d, respectively). The fraction of naturally pollinated seeds killed by inbreeding depression (D) in populations ranged from zero to 0.492, with an average of 0.330. We did not detect any significant correlations between D and population size or the degree of population isolation (r = –0.055 and 0.595, P = 0.892 and 0.069; Fig. 5e and f, respectively). The values of the inbreeding coefficients were significantly higher at the seed stage than at the adult stage in six of the 10 populations (Fig. 4). The Asahidani population had similar inbreeding coefficients at the seed and adult stages and did not exhibit inbreeding depression (δ = –0.096).
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

INBREEDING DEPRESSION IN MAGNOLIA STELLATA 2371 Late-stage inbreeding depression in M. stellata
                                                                                                                                   Fig.4 Comparisonsbetweeninbreedingcoefficientsforseed(white dots) and adult (black dots) stages in the 10 Magnolia stellata populations. Dots and bars represent values calculated with the original data set and their 95% bootstrap confidence intervals are based on 1000 resamplings among loci.
Discussion
Characteristics of the mating system in Magnolia stellata populations
The outcrossing rates at the population level were similar across the 10 Magnolia stellata populations (0.621–0.711), but the rates varied considerably among individuals within the populations. These patterns are similar to those obtained in a previous examination of outcrossing rates in five M. stellata populations distributed at the edges of the species’ range (Tamaki et al. 2009). However, in the present study, we obtained statistical support for consistent population-level outcrossing rates that were poorly resolved in the previous study because of weak statistical power due to small sample sizes. Further, the present study revealed that the correlation of paternity (rp), degree of biparental inbreeding (tm – ts and 1 – rs) and inbreeding coefficients at the seed stage (FS) differed significantly between some pairs of populations. Among the M. stellata populations, there were no significant differences in the level of outcrossing, but there were significant differences in its quality (i.e. rp, tm – ts and 1 – rs), and consequently, there may be differences in the degree of inbreeding among the populations. Eight of the 10 populations showed significant biparental inbreeding, as indicated by the significant positive values of tm – ts. Therefore, not only the outcrossing rate, but also the biparental inbreeding rate, must be considered when estimating the level of inbreeding in M. stellata populations to avoid underestimating the level of inbreeding.
populations
Six of the 10 populations showed significant differences between FS and FA, implying that for these populations latestage inbreeding depression (δ) is statistically significant. Early-stage inbreeding depression in this species has also been reported by Hirayama et al. (2007). The occurrence of late-stage inbreeding depression in M. stellata populations has been confirmed not only by our study, but also by Setsuko et al. (2004), who compared the inbreeding coefficients between small and large genets. In the cited study, the authors found that the value for small genets was positive and deviated significantly from zero, while that for large genets was close to zero, suggesting that late-stage inbreeding depression occurred as genets grow. Thus, late-stage inbreeding depression is likely to occur in M. stellata populations. The average value of δ estimated in this study was 0.709, which is slightly lower than the average value calculated for 150 mixed-mating plant species (0.81 ± 0.70) by Goodwillie et al. (2005), and lower than the value for the congeneric species M. obovata (0.94 to 0.99) calculated by Ishida (2008).
Effects of population size and isolation on the persistence of M. stellata populations
The estimated values of FS showed a significant negative correlation with population size, but not with the degree of population isolation. This may be because most mating events occur within populations — Setsuko et al. (2007) found that 97.5% of pollen flow occurred within local populations in a M. stellata metapopulation — hence the effects of population size on FS, which are largely related to withinpopulation gene dispersal, may be much greater than those of the degree of population isolation, which are largely related to among-population gene dispersal.
In theoretical predictions, small population size and population isolation reduce the degree of δ by purging of deleterious alleles, through the process of inbreeding depression by frequent inbreeding and selection to individuals of low fitness due to homozygote expression of deleterious recessive alleles (Charlesworth et al. 1990; Hedrick 1994; Byers & Waller 1999). The process of purging works efficiently when the effects of the deleterious alleles are strong, such as lethal or semi-lethal genes. The negative correlation between population size and FS indicates that the magnitude of inbreeding may be greater in small populations than in larger ones, but the δ values did not significantly correlate with population size or the degree of population isolation. However, the very low value of δ in the Asahidani population (δ = –0.096) provides indications of purging, since the Asahidani population is the smallest of the 10 studied populations and is located at the edge of the species’ range. There may be two reasons why other small or isolated populations did not show signs
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

2372 I. TAMAKI ET AL.
Fig. 5 Relationships between the inbreeding coefficient at the seed stage (FS) (a and b), late-stage inbreeding depression (δ) (c and d), the fraction of naturally pollinated seeds killed by inbreeding depression from seeds to adults (D) (e and f) and the size and degree of isolation of the 10 Magnolia stellata populations. Population size and the degree of population isolation are shown by the number of reproductive individuals in each population and the number of surrounding populations within a radius of 0.5 km around the focal population, respectively, as reported by Tamaki et al. (2008).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of purging. First, the time (in terms of generation) since they become small or isolated may have been too short to allow significant purging. In accordance with this hypothesis, M. stellata is a clone-forming tree species that reproduces by sprouting or layering (Gotoh et al. 1998), and thus, may be long-lived. Further, in M. stellata populations, the habitat destruction by the residential and industrial developments and the habitat degradation through vegetative succession due to the abandonment of forest management have occurred since the early 1970s, associated with Japan’s rapid economic growth (Japan Association for Shidekobushi Conservation 1996). Therefore, the time since most M. stellata populations became small or isolated may be less than 40 years, which may be too short for the effects of population size and population isolation to cause significant changes in the value of δ. However, this hypothesis may not hold the assumption underlying the method of estimating late-stage inbreeding depression from the differences in inbreeding coefficients between seeds and adults (i.e. inbreeding equilibrium
between generations). In populations that became small recently, the inbreeding coefficient at the seed stage at present can be higher than that when existing adult trees were produced. In such populations, thus, δ and D can be overestimated. Second, mildly deleterious recessive alleles may be associated with late-stage inbreeding depression in M. stellata. These types of deleterious alleles are difficult to purge from populations even when there is substantial inbreeding in the populations (Charlesworth et al. 1990). If this is true, then only extremely small and isolated populations, such as the Asahidani population, may be able to purge such deleterious alleles. The very low value of δ in the Asahidani population appears to promote the persistence of this population (GarciaDorado 2008), but there are other problems for such populations, for example, associated reductions in fitness and/ or the loss of evolutionary potential to adapt to changing environments, because the level of genetic variation in this population is very low (Tamaki et al. 2008). Another cause of the low value of δ in the Asahidani population (other than
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

purging) may be the relative reduction in the fitness of outcrossed progeny by fixation of deleterious alleles in the population (Keller & Waller 2002). In the Asahidani population, deleterious alleles may have been fixed by random genetic drift, since the degree of genetic variation in this population is very low (Tamaki et al. 2008).
D also showed no significant correlation with population size or the degree of population isolation. As noted above, the effects of small population size and population isolation differ in relation to the degree of inbreeding and inbreeding depression. Inbreeding reflects current gene dispersal, while inbreeding depression reflects historical cumulative gene dispersal. Therefore, the relationships between D and these two measures are complex. However, existing M. stellata populations that are small (and thus expected to have higher frequencies of inbreeding) and have large values of δ may be in danger of declining, even if the populations are located within the central region of the species’ range.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to members of the Laboratory of Forest Ecology and Physiology of Nagoya University for useful discussions. We also thank several Education Offices of local governments for permitting us to collect the samples, F. Yamada, M. Muto and T. Iwai for their help in the collection of samples and two anonymous reviewers for their variable comments on a previous draft of this paper. Financial support was provided by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (no. 16380100) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.
References
© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
INBREEDING DEPRESSION IN MAGNOLIA STELLATA 2373
