Ecological Monographs, 81(4), 2011, pp. 599–618 Ó 2011 by the Ecological Society of America
Ecological effects on metabolic scaling: amphipod responses to fish predators in freshwater springs
DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER,1 ERIC M. BUTLER,2 SARA A. LOMBARDI,3 TRAVIS J. DEPTOLA,4 ANDREW J. REESE, AND ERIN V. SATTERTHWAITE
Department of Biology, Juniata College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania 16652 USA
Abstract. Metabolic rate is commonly thought to scale with body mass to the 3/4 power as a result of universal body design constraints. However, recent comparative work has shown that the metabolic-scaling slope may vary significantly among species and higher taxa, apparently in response to different lifestyles and ecological conditions, though the precise mechanisms involved are not well understood. To better understand these underappreciated ecological effects and their causes, it is important to control for extraneous phylogenetic and environmental influences. We demonstrate how this may be done by comparing the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate among populations of the same species (the amphipod Gammarus minus) in mid-Appalachian freshwater springs with similar, relatively constant environmental conditions, except for the varying presence of the predatory fish Cottus cognatus. We found that populations of G. minus exhibit significantly lower metabolicscaling slopes (0.54–0.62) in three freshwater springs with C. cognatus than in two springs without these fish (0.76–0.77). We tested multiple hypothetical causes for these population differences. Our results best supported the hypothesis that metabolic scaling was influenced by the effects of size-selective predation on the ontogeny of growth, a metabolically expensive process. The body size scaling of growth is significantly less steep in the populations inhabiting springs with vs. without fish, thus paralleling the interpopulation differences in metabolic scaling. Prematurational growth of G. minus is as high or higher in the fish springs, whereas postmaturational growth is significantly lower, often approaching zero. Similarly, the amphipods in the fish springs tend to have higher metabolic rates at small sizes, but lower metabolic rates at large sizes, compared to those in the fishless springs. Our results do not support other hypothetical causes of the interpopulation variation in metabolic scaling, including differential scaling of cell size or low-metabolism body components (fat and mineralized exoskeleton), or possible effects of other environmental factors associated with the presence of fish. However, fish-induced population differences in adult behavioral activity may influence metabolic scaling in G. minus, a possibility under current study. We conclude that ecological factors may significantly influence metabolic scaling, contrary to common belief.
Key words: allometric scaling; Amphipoda; body mass and composition; cell size and number; Cottus cognatus; exoskeleton; fish predators; freshwater springs; Gammarus minus; growth; metabolic rate.
INTRODUCTION
Understanding the factors affecting the rate of metabolism is important because metabolic energy fuels all biological activities at various hierarchical levels from biochemical reactions to organismal and ecological processes. Much of the variation in respiratory metabolic rate (R), both within and among species, can be related to body mass (M ) often according to a power function:
Manuscript received 15 February 2011; revised 31 March 2011; accepted 1 April 2011. Corresponding Editor: N. J. Gotelli.
1 E-mail: glazier@juniata.edu
2 Present address: Department of Zoology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695 USA
3 Present address: Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742 USA
4 Present address: Department of Geosciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802 USA
R 1⁄4 aMb
where a is the scaling coefficient (antilog of the intercept in a log–log plot, at which M 1⁄4 1) and b is the scaling exponent (slope in a log–log plot). Since the seminal work of Kleiber (1932) and Hemmingsen (1960), it has been commonly assumed that b approximates 3/4 in most organisms, including animals, plants, and unicells (Brown et al. 2004, Savage et al. 2004). This 3/4-power law has been explained as being the result of the physical properties of internal resource–transport networks (e.g., Sernetz et al. 1989, West et al. 1997, Banavar et al. 1999, 2010, West and Brown 2005).
However, recent theoretical and empirical research questions the 3/4-power law and the resource–transport network (RTN) models proposed to explain it (reviewed in Agutter and Wheatley 2004, Glazier 2005, O’Connor et al. 2007, Agutter and Tuszynski 2011). Several comparative surveys of various animals and plants have
599

600 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
demonstrated that intraand interspecific values of b often differ significantly from 3/4, varying from approximately 2/3 to 1 (e.g., Bokma 2004, Glazier 2005, 2010, Reich et al. 2006, White et al. 2006, 2007, Isaac and Carbone 2010). For example, in a survey of 642 intraspecific metabolic-scaling relationships, 50.2% of the b values were significantly different from 3/4, which increased to .70% for data sets with sample sizes 􏰍 50 or body mass ranges spanning two or more orders of magnitude (Glazier 2005), and to 88.5% for data sets with body mass ranges exceeding 2.5 orders of magnitude (Glazier 2010; cf. Moses et al. 2008). Thus, for the statistically most reliable data sets, 3/4-power scaling is much more likely to be rejected than accepted.
Furthermore, recent studies suggest that the intraspecific metabolic-scaling exponent may be related to various ecological factors, including lifestyle, habitat, and temperature (Glazier 2005, 2006, 2010, Ohlberger et al. 2007, Hoque et al. 2010, Killen et al. 2010, McFeeters et al. 2011). For example, in four different phyla, pelagic (open-water) invertebrates typically exhibit b values near 1, whereas benthic (bottom-dwelling) species exhibit values significantly ,1 and closer to 3/4, a difference that is also seen within many species with pelagic larvae and benthic adults (Glazier 2006). The metabolic-scaling exponent also varies predictably with physiological (activity) state (Glazier 2008, 2009a, 2010). This systematic variation of b suggests that deviations from 3/4-power scaling are not merely ‘‘noise’’ obscuring the ‘‘signal’’ of a single universal scaling law (Glazier 2010).
Therefore, a reassessment of the currently influential RTN models of West et al. (1997) and others seems to be in order because in their original form they incorrectly assume that the scaling exponent is universally constrained to a single optimal value by internal body design features, independently of the ecology and physiological state of the organisms being considered. Although Enquist et al. (2007 ), Price et al. (2007 ) and Kolokotrones et al. (2010) suggest that the network parameters of the model of West et al. (1997) can be modified to accommodate variation in the metabolic-scaling slope, several critiques argue that various problems with the assumptions and mathematical logic of this model and that of Banavar et al. (1999) prevent them from predicting the postulated central value of 3/4, as claimed (these critiques and various rebuttals are reviewed in Glazier 2005, 2010, Agutter and Tuszynski 2011). By focusing on single or a limited range of scaling exponents (e.g., 2/3 or 3/4) the newest versions of these models, by themselves and as currently formulated (e.g., Banavar et al. 2010, Dodds 2010), are also incapable of explaining the full diversity of metabolic scaling that actually exists.
Although associations between ecological factors and the metabolic-scaling exponent are receiving increasing attention, they remain underappreciated, in part because we still know little about the precise mechanisms causing these associations. A clear, mechanistic understanding of these ecological effects would facilitate the develop-
ment of new theoretical models that better explain the diversity of metabolic scaling than do the current RTN models (cf. Glazier 2005, 2010). To accomplish this, it is important to control for extraneous phylogenetic and environmental influences. Phylogenetic effects plague interspecific analyses of metabolic scaling (see Capellini et al. 2010, White 2011), but these can be largely avoided by intraspecific analyses (cf. Bokma 2004, Glazier 2005, 2006, Vaca and White 2010). The effects of extraneous environmental influences may also be minimized by exploiting ecological systems that have relatively uniform and constant environmental conditions other than the factor of interest. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate, for the first time, how a causal analysis of an ecological effect on metabolic scaling can be carried out using a model system with minimal extraneous phylogenetic and environmental influences. First, we compared the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate among populations of the same species (the amphipod crustacean Gammarus minus) in mid-Appalachian freshwater springs with similar, relatively constant environmental conditions, except for the varying presence of a predatory fish (the slimy sculpin, Cottus cognatus). Second, we tested multiple hypothetical causes for the interpopulation variation in metabolic scaling that we observed. Third, we compared our results to the predictions of several theoretical models and discuss their implications for our general understanding of metabolic scaling.
We tested whether the presence of predators affects the metabolic-scaling exponent of G. minus for six reasons. First, it is well known that predators may directly induce or indirectly select for major alterations of various morphological, behavioral, and life-history characteristics of prey organisms (e.g., Sih 1987, Reznick et al. 1990, Lima 1998, Tollrian and Dodson 1999, Peckarsky et al. 2001, Stoks et al. 2003, Vamosi 2005, Laundre ́ et al. 2010, Dennis et al. 2011, Strobbe et al. 2011), including amphipods (Strong 1972, 1973, Andersson et al. 1986, Wellborn 1994a, 1995, A ̊ bjo ̈ rnsson et al. 2000, 2004, 2009, Cothran 2004, Bollache et al. 2006, Kullmann et al. 2008) and in particular, G. minus (Holomuzki and Hoyle 1990, Wooster 1998, Glazier 1999, Glazier and Deptola 2011). Since the expression of many of these characteristics (e.g., foraging activity, growth rate, and reproductive output) is energy, age, and/or body size related (e.g., Sih 1987, Reznick et al. 1990, Wellborn 1994a, Glazier 1999, Wohlfahrt et al. 2007, Preisser et al. 2009, Dennis et al. 2011), we aimed to explore whether predators may also cause changes in various physiological properties, including the scaling of metabolic rate. Second, plausible claims have been made that predator–prey interactions may influence metabolic scaling in aquatic invertebrates (Glazier 2006) and fish (Killen et al. 2010). Third, in central Pennsylvania, G. minus occurs in freshwater springs with and without fish predators. Furthermore, the effects of these different local predator regimes on G. minus should be accentu-

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 601
ated by the limited dispersal ability of this species and the relative isolation of the springs that it inhabits, as indicated by the significant genetic differentiation among its populations (Gooch 1990, Gooch and Glazier 1991). This situation also represents a useful natural experiment because other environmental factors that can affect metabolic rate, such as water temperature and chemical composition, are relatively uniform both within and across study sites (Glazier and Gooch 1987, Glazier et al. 1992, Glazier 1998). Indeed, the physicochemical constancy of springs makes them excellent natural laboratories for studying a wide variety of biological phenomena (Glazier 2009e). Fourth, G. minus undergoes no developmental metamorphosis (i.e., newly released neonates look like miniature adults), thus simplifying the interpretation of ontogenetic metabolicscaling patterns. Fifth, the body mass range of G. minus is more than 30-fold, thus ensuring adequate statistical power of the scaling analyses (see Results: Fig. 2). Sixth, G. minus is easy to collect and study in the field and laboratory at all times of the year (Glazier 1998).
In this first report of an ongoing study, we not only demonstrate that the ontogenetic metabolic-scaling exponent (b) differs significantly between populations of G. minus inhabiting springs with and without the fish predator Cottus cognatus, but also we tested multiple hypothetical causes for these differences, including interpopulation variation in the allometric scaling of growth rate, body composition, and cell size and number. Since predation by C. cognatus and other visually foraging fish is size selective (e.g., Newman and Waters 1984, Wellborn 1994a), it is not surprising that the mean and maximal adult sizes of G. minus and other amphipods are usually smaller in habitats with fish predators vs. without fish predators (Fig. 1; Strong 1972, Holomuzki and Hoyle 1990, Glazier et al. 1992, Wellborn 1994a, 1995; Glazier 1999, Wellborn et al. 2005, but see A ̊ bjo ̈ rnsson et al. 2009). Therefore, we predicted that ageand size-specific growth rates should also vary with predator regime (as seen in Hyalella amphipods; Wellborn 1994b), and that, since growth is metabolically expensive ( Wieser 1994 ), ontogenetic variation in its intensity should affect the scaling of metabolic rate with growing body mass, as well (see Riisga ̊ rd 1998, Glazier 2005, Czarnołeski et al. 2008). In addition, we tested whether disproportionate increases in metabolically inert exoskeleton, as a possible deterrent to size-selective fish predators, may affect the slope of ontogenetic metabolic scaling. And since theory predicts that rates of growth and metabolism may be related to cell size (Davison 1955, 1956, Arendt 2000, Kozłowski et al. 2003, Glazier 2005, Chown et al. 2007), we tested whether differences in the relative contribution of increases in cell size vs. number to body growth were related to differences in the ontogenetic scaling of metabolic and growth rates. Although not directly tested here, we also evaluated other hypothetical causes for the differences in metabolic scaling that we observed
FIG. 1. Relative (percentage) frequency of amphipods (Gammarus minus) in six adult body length classes (base of first antenna to base of telson) in springs in central Pennsylvania, USA. Two springs without the fish predator Cottus cognatus (gray bars represent Petersburg and Kanesatake Springs) and two springs with this fish (black bars represent Ell and Blue Springs) were sampled during July–August 1990 and January 1991 (n 1⁄4 804, 462, 128, and 574, respectively), using a small-scale Surber-type sampler covering an area of 172.5 cm2 (as part of the survey reported in Glazier et al. [1992]). Note that the relative frequency of amphipods in the larger size classes is significantly lower in the populations inhabiting springs with fish vs. without fish (Kruskal-Wallis test statistic H 1⁄4 19.65, df 1⁄4 3, P 1⁄4 0.0002).
by using relevant, pre-existing data on our study populations and those of other amphipods (e.g., interpopulation differences in foraging activity, body fat content, and other factors possibly incidentally associated with the presence of fish predators, including habitat variation and indirect effects of predation on levels of amphipod stress and population density).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study system
The amphipod Gammarus minus is a common detritivore in hard-water springs, streams, and groundwaters of the mid-Appalachians west to the Ozarks in North America (Holsinger 1976, Culver et al. 1995). The study sites (located in Blair and Huntingdon Counties of central Pennsylvania, USA) are small rheocrenes (lotic springs) that have many similar physical and chemical properties, including high water clarity, shallow depth (,0.5 m), moderate water velocity (;0.1–1 m/s), a heterogeneous substrate (including cobbles, gravel, sand and silt) with patches of macrophytes (mosses and/or watercress), and nearly constant water temperatures (9– 128C) and ionic composition (relatively alkaline with nearly neutral pH, ranging from 6.6 to 7.7), but differ in predation regime (Glazier and Gooch 1987, Glazier et al. 1992). The predatory fish Cottus cognatus is found in Ell, Blue, and Williamsburg Springs (its abundance increasing in that order, Glazier 1999, Glazier and Deptola 2011), but not in Petersburg and Kanesatake
 
602 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
Springs, a difference that has been consistently observed for over 25 years (since 1984), as has the relatively uniform temperature and chemical composition of these springs (Glazier and Gooch 1987, Glazier et al. 1992, Glazier 1999; D. S. Glazier, personal observations). Apparently C. cognatus has not been able to colonize Petersburg Spring because of a steep downstream manmade waterfall, nor Kanesatake Spring because of its very shallow water. Numerous individuals of G. minus have been found in the stomachs of C. cognatus (D. S. Glazier, personal observations). Other potential predators such as salamanders and crayfish are relatively rare in these springs. A few trout have also been observed, but only in Blue and Williamsburg Springs. Other environmental characteristics of the study springs are described elsewhere (Glazier and Gooch 1987, Glazier et al. 1992, Glazier 1999, Glazier and Deptola 2011).
Respirometry
Metabolic (respiration) rates were estimated as oxygen consumption rates of individual amphipods (total of 526, with n 1⁄4 81 to 124 from each of five populations, three from springs with fish, and two from springs without fish) using a Strathkelvin respirometry system (following Glazier and Sparks 1997) in an environmental control room (108C 1⁄4 average spring water temperature). Amphipods with a wide range of sizes were collected using hand nets during spring to fall 2004, spring and fall 2005, and fall 2006, and maintained briefly (usually no more than two weeks) at 108C in aerated 1-L culture vessels with natural detrital leaf food in the natural spring water of each population examined. Adults included only males to avoid possible effects of broods of eggs or embryos that are carried by females on the estimation of metabolic rate (cf. Glazier 1991). Oxygen consumption was measured in amphipods that had been fasted for 24 h (to remove the energetic costs of specific dynamic action, and to minimize accumulation of excretory products) in porous 120-mL cups placed in 15-L basins of natural spring water (filtered through Whatman GF/F 0.7-lm glass fiber filters to remove bacteria and fine organic matter). Since they are coprophagous, each amphipod was fasted singly in the upper compartment of a cup, which was separated by 1mm nylon mesh from the lower compartment where feces collected and could not be eaten. The respirometers were glass syringes containing population-specific spring water (filtered as just described). Syringe size (2, 5, or 10 mL) and water volume varied with size of the amphipod, so that the oxygen concentration never dropped below 63% saturation (and usually not below 75% saturation) during ;6 h of incubation. Pieces of 0.3-mm nylon mesh in each syringe minimized amphipod movement and associated energy expenditure (cf. Bulnheim 1979). The mesh permitted stationary clinging behavior and restricted the space in which the amphipods could move. Effects of activity were also reduced by making respiration measurements during the day when the
amphipods were least active (cf. Elliott 2002). Each syringe had a blunted needle that was plugged and sealed to the syringe with melted wax. Care was taken to remove all air bubbles before incubation. Controls were without amphipods (one control per four experimental syringes). Data for amphipods that molted during a respirometry run were omitted because molting in amphipods and other arthropods increases metabolic rate above normal resting levels (Sutcliffe 1984, Glazier 2005). Oxygen concentrations of 50-lL water samples were measured in a Strathkelvin microcell containing a 1302 oxygen electrode connected to a Strathkelvin Model 781 oxygen meter (Strathkelvin Instruments, Glasgow, UK). Rate of oxygen consumption (RO2, mL O2/h) was calculated as
RO2 1⁄41⁄2ðPE 􏰀PCÞS3A3V􏰊=t
where PE is the partial pressure (1 Torr ’ 1 mm Hg) of oxygen in an experimental syringe, PC is the partial pressure of oxygen in a control syringe, S is the solubility coefficient of oxygen in water (2.22 lmol􏰋L􏰀1􏰋Torr􏰀1 at 108C), A is the volume of 1 mol O2 at standard temperature and pressure (22.414 L/ mol), V is the volume of water in a syringe (liters), and t is the incubation time (h). RO2 was converted to rate of energy expenditure per hour (RE) by using an oxyjoule equivalent of 21 J/mL of oxygen consumed (Elliott and Davison 1975).
Immediately after a respiration rate measurement was made, each amphipod was stored at􏰀708C, freeze-dried for 60 h, and weighed (61 lg) on a Cahn C-31 microbalance (Cahn Instruments, Cerritos, California, USA).
Body composition
Ash content (an index of the proportion of the body consisting of mineralized exoskeleton) was measured in random samples of amphipods of varying body sizes collected during July to August 2005, March to April 2006, February to June 2008, and February 2010 (total of 251, with n1⁄432 to 72 from each of five populations). Dried specimens were weighed and then incinerated in a Type 1300 muffle furnace (Thermolyne, Dubuque, Iowa, USA) at 500–6008C for 1 h. The residual inorganic ash of each specimen was then weighed and compared to total dry mass. Adults included only males to avoid possible effects of broods of offspring that are carried by females on estimates of ash mass relative to total body mass.
Cell size and number
We used eye facet (ommatidium) size and number as readily measured indicators of relative cell size and number in amphipods of different size (following Davison 1956, Stevenson et al. 1995, Heinze et al. 2003, Chown et al. 2007). This index is based upon the assumption that the size and number of cells in an arthropod compound eye are directly proportional to the size and number of ommatidia, respectively. In support, ommatidia of various sizes consist of a constant

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 603
or nearly constant number of retinular (photoreceptor) cells in various groups of arthropods (Oakley 2003), including amphipods (Hallberg et al. 1980). Furthermore, this proportional correspondence makes developmental and evolutionary sense. It should be more efficient to construct modular structures (compound eyes) out of modules (eye facets) that consist of the same vs. different numbers and kinds of cells because they would require less coding information, and thus should be favored by natural selection.
The eye facet method was used to estimate the scaling of cell size and number with body size (using eye size as a proxy), because theory predicts that this scaling should be related to the scaling of metabolic rate (see Discussion). This use of the eye facet method further assumes that the scaling of eye cell size reflects that for the whole body, which is supported by the parallel scaling of eye facet size (a proxy for eye cell size) with eye size and the scaling of muscle cell size with body size in the crayfish Procambrus alleni (Davison 1956) and of wing cell size with wing size in Hawaiian fruit flies (Drosophila spp.; Stevenson et al. 1995). Parallel cell size scaling with body size in different tissues has also been observed in some vertebrate animals (Kozłowski et al. 2010).
Eye facet area served as a useful, easy-to-measure index of ommatidium size, which was facilitated by the flat surface of the sessile compound eyes of G. minus (Culver et al. 1995), as is typical of amphipods (Hallberg et al. 1980). Eye facet area and number were determined with a visual analysis system, and compared with total eye area (eye facet area multiplied by eye facet number) for samples of juvenile and adult male amphipods collected from each study population during June to August 2007 (total of 308, with n 1⁄4 55 to 68 from each of five populations). Mean facet area was determined from four facets in the center of each eye because of ease of visualization. Their areas were representative of the facets found in other regions of the eye (i.e., they showed no systematic differences in size between the center and the periphery of the eye; see Glazier and Deptola 2011). Each amphipod (anesthetized with CO2 water) was examined at 403 magnification while in water in a depression slide capped by a glass cover slip that were all fastened to a compound microscope stage. A Sony CCD-Iris color video camera (model SSC-c374; Sony Electronics Montvale, New Jersey, USA) attached to the microscope was used to visualize images on a Pyle LCD TFT color monitor (model PLVW-700; Pyle Audio, Brooklyn, New York, USA) and to save them on a computer using Snappy Video Snapshot software (Play Incorporated, Rancho Cordova, California, USA). ImageJ 1.41 software (available online) was used to estimate facet area (60.0001 mm2) and number of each eye.5
5 hhttp://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/i
Growth rates
Size-specific growth rates were estimated in individual amphipods (total of 664; see also below in this section) cultured in field enclosures for three weeks in four of the five study springs during June to November 2008. Growth rates were not examined in Williamsburg Spring amphipods because we did not wish to overexploit (and thus possibly endanger) this low-density, heavily predated population (also see Discussion). Growth rates were measured for five size classes (1–2, 3–4, 5–6, 7–8, and 9–10 mm body length) by comparing final wet mass (Mf ) with initial wet mass (Mi ) (except for Blue and Ell Springs, where the largest size class was absent) or by calculating relative growth rates (log10[mg wet body mass]/d) as
ðlog10Mf 􏰀 log10MiÞ=t
where t is time (days). Live amphipods were blotted with tissue paper (Kimwipes) to remove excess water and weighed with a Cahn microbalance (61 lg) all within the same time period (;30 s) to minimize mass variation due to differential water evaporation. Adults included only males because females often carried offspring in their brood pouches that would cause misleading estimates of somatic growth. The field enclosures were translucent plastic cylinders (55 mm length and 25 mm diameter for 1to 4mm juveniles; 80 mm length and 55 mm diameter for 5to 10-mm adults) capped at each end with 0.3-mm nylon mesh allowing water circulation with the environment. Each enclosure contained a single amphipod with sufficient natural detrital leaf food to last three weeks. The first series of trials during June to August 2008 involved observing growth rates of amphipods (total of 406, with n 1⁄4 87 to 116 from each of four populations) cultured in their home springs. The second series of trials during September to November 2008, involved observing growth rates of amphipods (total of 258, with n 1⁄4 84 to 89 from each of three populations) cultured in a nonnative spring with a different predator regime (i.e., amphipods from Petersburg Spring with no fish were transplanted into Blue Spring with fish, and vice versa; and amphipods from Kanesatake Spring with no fish were transplanted into Ell Spring with fish, though the reciprocal transplant of Ell amphipods into Kanesatake Spring was prevented by unusually low water levels in this spring during the study period).
Statistical analyses
The two most commonly used methods of analyzing mass-scaling relationships are least-squares regression (LSR) and reduced major axis (RMA) analyses (Smith 2009, Glazier 2010, White 2011). We used LSR rather than RMA analyses because LSR is more appropriate when the X variable is thought to be influencing the Y variable, rather than the reverse (Smith 2009), and when Y is associated with significantly more measurement error than X, as seems to be the case for metabolic rate (Y ) and body mass (X ) (Glazier 2010, White 2011).

604 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
Although this causal structure and (or) error distribution may not apply to all of our other scaling analyses, we continued to use LSR for the sake of comparative consistency, and because all of the other scaling relationships have a high correlation coefficient (r . 0.9), thus resulting in the scaling exponents (b) based on LSR and RMA analyses being very similar anyway (bRMA 1⁄4 bLSR/r). Log10 values were used to normalize the data variation and to produce linear, proportional relationships that could be readily compared and interpreted (cf. Kerkhoff and Enquist 2009, White 2011). The significance of differences among scaling exponents (slopes) and intercepts was estimated by ANCOVA (with body mass as a covariate), and by comparing these parameters using 95% confidence intervals. If a mean value was outside the 95% CI of another mean value and vice versa, they were considered significantly different (P , 0.05), following Smith (1997). Complete nonoverlap of the 95% CI of two means indicated a highly significant difference (P , 0.01; Belia et al. 2005, Cumming 2008). All of our scaling analyses were based on large sample sizes (n . 30; and for the mass-scaling of metabolic and growth rates, n . 80), thus reducing the possibility that the interpopulation differences that we observed were due simply to measurement error (cf. Bokma 2004, Hui and Jackson 2007, Moses et al. 2008).
RESULTS
Ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate
Significant relationships between resting metabolic rate and body mass were seen in all five population samples of Gammarus minus (Fig. 2, Table 1). The scaling exponents (b) differed significantly among some of the populations, as indicated by a significant population 3 body mass interaction (Table 1). Specifically, the scaling exponents were all significantly lower for the populations in the springs with vs. without fish (Figs. 2 and 3), and they varied inversely with the relative abundance of the predatory fish Cottus cognatus (Fig. 3). In addition, although the b values of the two populations in the fishless springs were not significantly different from the theoretical value of 3/4, all of the b values of the three populations in the fish springs were significantly less than 3/4.
Ontogenetic scaling of exoskeleton mass (indexed by ash content)
Significant relationships between ash mass (an index of exoskeleton mass) and total dry body mass were seen in all five population samples (Fig. 4, Table 1). The scaling exponents (b) differed significantly among some of the populations, as indicated by a significant population 3 body mass interaction (Table 1). However, these b values were not consistently different between the populations from springs with vs. without fish (Fig. 4B), even though the highest values were found in the two populations from the springs with the highest
densities of fish (Blue and Williamsburg). The ash–mass scaling relationships also tended to converge at large body masses (Fig. 4A), thus suggesting that relatively large adult amphipods have similar exoskeleton mass in all five populations, regardless of the presence or absence of fish predators.
Ontogenetic scaling of cell size and number (indexed by eye facet size and number)
Eye facet (ommatidium) area (a proxy for cell size) scaled to total eye area with a slope near 1/2 in all five populations (Fig. 5). Therefore, facet enlargement and multiplication (and by inference cell enlargement and multiplication) contributed approximately equally to the growth of the compound eye (and by inference total body size) in all five populations, regardless of the presence or absence of fish predators (see also the Materials and Methods and Discussion sections).
Ontogenetic scaling of growth rate
Growth rate during a three-week culture period either in a home spring or transplant spring was estimated by comparing final body mass with initial body mass. For both the home and transplant studies, highly significant relationships between final body mass in relation to initial body mass were observed (Figs. 6 and 7). In every case, the slopes of these relationships were significantly less than one, thus indicating decreasing growth rate with increasing body size (Figs. 6–8). However, the slopes of these relationships differed significantly among some of the populations, as indicated by a significant population 3 body mass interaction (Table 1). The slopes of the population samples from springs with fish were consistently less than those from springs without fish, regardless of whether or not they were transplanted into a spring with a different predator regime (Figs. 6F and 7D). The amphipods from springs with fish show near zero growth at relatively large body sizes (Figs. 6C, D, 7C, and 8), whereas those from springs without fish show positive growth at all sizes (Figs. 6A, B, 7A, B, and 8). The transplant procedure had no significant effect on the scaling slopes or elevations of growth rate, except the elevation of the relationship (or the body size adjusted mean growth rate) was significantly (slightly) decreased when the Petersburg amphipods were transplanted from their home spring with no fish into a spring (Blue) with fish (Table 2).
DISCUSSION
First, we discuss the major question driving this study: How and why does the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate of the amphipod Gammarus minus vary between populations in freshwater springs with and without the predatory fish Cottus cognatus? Second, to provide context for our findings, we evaluate some of the hypothetical mechanisms potentially responsible for the negative allometry of resting metabolic rate generally observed in G. minus populations and most other animals.

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 605
 FIG. 2. Resting metabolic rate in relation to dry body mass, both log10-transformed, in five populations of the amphipod Gammarus minus. Resting metabolic rate was originally measured in J/h; dry body mass in lg. Least-squares regression lines and equations are shown (numbers in parentheses are 95% CI for the intercepts and slopes; r 1⁄4 correlation coefficient; n 1⁄4 sample size; P 1⁄4 probability that the correlation is due to chance). (A, B) Scaling relationships for two populations in springs without fish predators (Cottus cognatus). (C, D, E) Scaling relationships for three populations in springs with fish predators. (F) Comparison of all five scaling relationships, with abbreviations of the springs as follows: E, Ell Spring; W, Williamsburg Spring; B, Blue Spring; P, Petersburg Spring; and K, Kanesatake Spring. The vertical lines and horizontal bidirectional arrows indicate body mass intervals where each of the scaling relationships of the three populations exposed to fish (black lines) intersects the relationships for the two populations not exposed to fish (gray lines). Note that, at small body masses (juveniles , 4-mm body length or 0.5-mg dry body mass), resting metabolic rate tends to be higher in the amphipods from springs with vs. without fish, whereas the opposite tends to occur at large body masses (adults . 6-mm body length or 1.5-mg dry body mass).
This discussion includes comparisons of our results with several theoretical models. Third, we conclude by discussing some of the general implications of our study.
Fish predators and the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate
Multiple explanations are possible for why the scaling exponent (b) for resting metabolic rate is significantly
lower in G. minus populations inhabiting springs with vs. without fish predators (Figs. 2 and 3). Fish may directly or indirectly induce or select for changes in the scaling of metabolic rate or of other biological traits that affect metabolic rate (e.g., protective, metabolically inert exoskeleton mass; cell size and number; and/or rates of growth and behavioral activity). Or perhaps the scaling of metabolic rate is related to other environmental

606 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
TABLE 1. Variation in resting metabolic rate (RMR), ash mass (AM), and growth (G) among 3–5 populations of the amphipod
Gammarus minus in lotic springs in central Pennsylvania, USA.
Population effect Body mass effect Population 3 body mass effect Variable df F P df F P df F P
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
       RMR 4, 516 AM 4, 241 Gh 3, 398 Gt 2, 252
2.69 0.031 10.97 ,0.001 7.17 ,0.001 12.65 ,0.001
1, 516 1, 241 1, 398 1, 252
667.19 ,0.001 2111.71 ,0.001 4206.13 ,0.001 3024.52 ,0.001
4, 516 4, 241 3, 398 2, 252
2.82 0.025
9.62 ,0.001 15.19 ,0.001 10.79 ,0.001
 Notes: Growth was estimated as final wet mass relative to initial wet mass over a three-week culture period either in a home spring (Gh) or transplant spring (Gt). Variation was analyzed with ANCOVA (the covariate was dry body mass for RMR and AM, and wet body mass for G) using log10-transformed data.
factors that are incidentally associated with the presence of fish. Here we discuss these hypotheses, some of which were tested in this study or are currently being tested.
The ‘‘armor’’ hypothesis.—According to this hypothesis, amphipods in springs with visually hunting fish should develop increased antipredator ‘‘armor’’ (exoskeleton mass), especially in large conspicuous adults, relative to those in springs without fish. If metabolically inert exoskeleton mass increases more with increasing body size in amphipods from fish springs, this would result in a decrease in the metabolic-scaling exponent, as was observed. This hypothesis was inspired by the observation that fish predators can induce the development of thicker and spinier carapaces in cladocerans (e.g., Tollrian and Dodson 1999). Spines in some amphipods also appear to deter fish predation (Bollache et al. 2006). However, contrary to expectation, we observed no differential spinescence among our study populations (they all have smooth cuticles), nor did we find any consistent interpopulation relationship between the scaling of metabolic rate and of ash mass, an index of exoskeleton mass (compare Figs. 2F and 3 with Fig. 4A, B). Moreover, ash mass tends to converge towards a similar value in relatively large adult amphipods (Fig. 4B), rather than diverging to relatively large values in adults from fish springs and to relatively small values in adults from fishless springs, as predicted by the armor hypothesis. We therefore provisionally reject the armor hypothesis, though it would be useful to further test this hypothesis with other measures of exoskeleton mass (e.g., chitin content, molt masses, or exoskeleton thickness; cf. Glazier and Calow 1992, Simcˇ icˇ and Brancelj 2003). It is also possible that fish predation favors a redistribution of exoskeleton mass (e.g., dorsal thickening vs. ventral thinning) rather than a change in total exoskeleton mass, but if so, this would not change our tentative conclusion that the scaling of exoskeleton mass has had little or no influence on the scaling of metabolic rate in G. minus.
Scaling of cell size and number.—The cell size model predicts that metabolic scaling should be related to the relative contribution of cell enlargement vs. multiplication to body growth (Davison 1955, Kozłowski et al. 2003). We tested whether this model may help explain the interpopulation differences in metabolic scaling that we observed by using eye facet size and number as
proxies for cell size and number, and total eye size as a proxy for body size (see the Materials and Methods section). Contrary to expectation, the scaling of eye facet area with total eye area (and by inference the scaling of cell size with body size) did not vary significantly among the five study populations. Therefore, we provisionally conclude that the cell size model cannot explain the observed interpopulation differences in metabolic scaling, though it would be useful to further test this model with more direct estimates of cell size and number in various tissues. However, the cell size model may help
 FIG. 3.
rate in relation to dry body mass in five populations of the amphipod Gammarus minus. Note that the scaling slope for each of the three populations (see Fig. 2 for abbreviations) in springs with fish predators is significantly lower (P , 0.05) than that for each of the two populations in springs without fish (the 95% CI of the former does not overlap the b values of the latter, and vice versa). The apparent effect of the presence of fish on the scaling slope is further supported by the high significance of the entire combination of observed differences between populations in the fish vs. fishless springs (P , 0.000000016, as determined using simple probability theory), and by the inverse correlation seen between the slope and fish density (the number captured/0.5 h in an area of 100 m2 is shown in parentheses below each error bar; data are from Glazier and Deptola [2011]). In addition, all of the scaling slopes for the populations in the fish springs are significantly ,0.75 (dotted horizontal line, according to the 3/4-power law) and 0.833 (dashed horizontal line, as predicted by the cell size model using data presented in Fig. 5), but both of these predicted b values are within the 95% CI for the observed b values of the populations in the fishless springs. The range of sample sizes (n) for the observed slopes is indicated.
Scaling slopes (b 6 95% CI) of resting metabolic

November 2011
ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS
ON METABOLIC SCALING 607
 FIG. 4. The scaling of log10 ash mass (an index of exoskeleton mass; originally measured in mg) in relation to log10 dry body mass (originally measured in mg) in five populations of the amphipod Gammarus minus. (A) Leastsquares regression lines are shown, comparing three populations inhabiting springs with fish predators (black lines; Ell Spring [E], Y 1⁄4􏰀0.617 (60.024) þ 0.794 (60.055)X, r 1⁄4 0.964, n 1⁄4 66, P , 0.001; Blue Spring [B], Y 1⁄4 􏰀0.736 (60.032) þ 1.013 (60.064)X, r 1⁄4 0.984, n 1⁄4 36, P , 0.001; Williamsburg Spring [W], Y 1⁄4􏰀0.699 (60.042) þ 1.071 (60.155)X, r 1⁄4 0.932, n 1⁄4 32, P , 0.001; numbers in parentheses are 95% CIs for the intercepts and slopes) with two populations inhabiting springs without fish (gray lines; Petersburg Spring [P], Y 1⁄4 􏰀0.725 (60.023) þ 0.950 (60.039)X, r 1⁄4 0.992, n 1⁄4 44, P , 0.001; Kanesatake Spring [K], Y 1⁄4􏰀0.666 (60.052) þ 0.803 (60.089)X, r 1⁄4 0.906, n 1⁄4 72, P , 0.001). (B) Scaling slopes (b 6 95% CI) are shown. Note that b shows no consistent differences between amphipod samples from fish vs. fishless springs, though the highest slopes (b ’ 1) are found in the populations from the springs with the highest densities of fish (Blue and Williamsburg). The range of samples sizes (n) for the observed slopes is indicated.
explain why the metabolic-scaling slope is significantly ,1 in all of the populations, as further discussed in the subsection Primary internal constraints with secondary ecological effects. It is also possible that the scaling slope of near 1/2 for eye facet area in relation to total eye area has a functional significance that is unrelated to metabolic scaling (e.g., this scaling could help maintain visual acuity; see Barlow 1952).
Scaling of growth rate.—Although the cellular mode of growth does not appear to explain the interpopulation differences in metabolic scaling observed in G.
minus, the total rate of growth does appear to be important in this regard. Growth is a major contributor to total metabolic rate (Wieser 1994), and thus its ageand size-specific variation can significantly affect the ontogenetic scaling of metabolic rate (Riisga ̊ rd 1998, Glazier 2005, Czarnołeski et al. 2008, Peng et al. 2010). Growth may even affect the metabolic rates of briefly fasted, resting animals because the metabolic machinery needed for sustaining growth may still be active, even if at a reduced rate. Accordingly, artificial selection for an increased growth rate in the edible snail Helix aspersa also increased the scaling exponent for resting metabolic rate (Czarnołeski et al. 2008). Furthermore, the rates of growth hormone secretion, cell division, and protein synthesis tend to peak during the resting, non-feeding (sleep) phases of an animal’s daily cycle (see Adam and Oswald 1983, Van Cauter et al. 1998). Since freshwater amphipods are typically most active at night (Elliott 2002), the effects of growth on metabolic rate may be greatest during the relatively inactive diurnal period when we made our metabolic rate measurements. As expected, in our study populations of G. minus, the scaling exponents for resting metabolic rate paralleled those for growth rate (compare Fig. 3 with Figs. 6F and 7D). All four of the populations that we studied exhibited scaling exponents for growth rate that are within the 95% confidence intervals of the scaling exponents for metabolic rate. The scaling exponents for growth and metabolic rate are also both lower in the populations inhabiting springs with fish vs. without fish. This difference largely results from the amphipods in the fish springs showing determinate growth (little or no postmaturational growth; Figs. 6C, D, and 8), whereas the amphipods in the fishless springs show indeterminate
FIG. 5. Scaling slopes (b 6 95% CI) of eye facet (ommatidium) area with total eye area in five populations (see Fig. 2 for abbreviations) of the amphipod Gammarus minus. None of the scaling slopes is significantly different from 0.5 nor are they different from one another (ANCOVA, F1, 298 1⁄4 1.204, P 1⁄4 0.309). This pattern indicates that increases in eye facet size and number (and by inference cell size and number) have contributed approximately equally to growth in eye size (and presumably body size) regardless of the presence or absence of fish predators (Cottus cognatus). The range of sample sizes (n) for the observed slopes is indicated.
 
608 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
 FIG. 6. Ontogenetic scaling of growth rate of amphipods (Gammarus minus) cultured in field enclosures for three weeks in their home springs, as indicated by log10(final wet body mass) plotted against log10(initial wet body mass) for four populations. Both the initial and final wet body mass values were originally measured in milligrams. Least-squares regression lines and equations are shown (numbers in parentheses are 95% CIs for the intercepts and slopes; r is the correlation coefficient; n is sample size; P is the probability that the correlation is due to chance). The dotted diagonal lines indicate zero growth. (A, B) Scaling relationships for two populations in springs without fish predators (Cottus cognatus). (C, D) Scaling relationships for two populations in springs with fish predators. (E) Comparison of all four scaling relationships. (F) Scaling slopes (b 6 95% CI) of log10(final wet body mass) in relation to log10(initial wet body mass). Note that the scaling slope for each of the two populations in springs with fish predators is significantly lower (P , 0.05) than that for each of the two populations in springs without fish (the 95% CI of the former do not overlap the b values of the latter, and vice versa). The apparent effect of the presence of fish on the scaling slope is further supported by the high significance of the entire combination of observed differences between populations in the fish vs. fishless springs (P , 0.00000625).
growth (continuous postmaturational growth; Figs. 6A, B, and 8). This intraspecific difference in growth mode is remarkable because it often characterizes different major taxonomic groups (e.g., the determinate growth of most birds and mammals vs. the indeterminate growth of many fishes and reptiles). Why has this marked divergence in growth mode occurred?
The presence of fish predators may affect the scaling of growth rate (and in turn metabolic rate) in multiple ways. For example, changes in ageand size-specific growth rates may be phenotypically plastic responses induced by visual, olfactory, or tactile cues emitted by fish, or they may be genetic, evolutionary responses resulting from size-selective predation (for general

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 609
 FIG. 7. Ontogenetic scaling of growth rate of amphipods (Gammarus minus) cultured in field enclosures for three weeks in a transplant spring with a predator regime different from that of the home spring, as indicated by log10(final wet body mass) plotted against log10(initial wet body mass) for three populations. Both the initial and final wet body mass values were originally measured in milligrams. Least-squares regression lines and equations are shown (as in Fig. 6). The dotted diagonal lines indicate zero growth. (A, B) Scaling relationships for two samples of amphipods transplanted from springs without fish (Petersburg and Kanesatake) into springs with the predatory fish Cottus cognatus (Blue and Ell). (C) Scaling relationship for a sample of amphipods transplanted from a spring with fish predators (Blue) into a spring without fish (Petersburg). (D) Scaling slopes (b 6 95% CI) of log10(final wet body mass) in relation to log10(initial wet body mass). Note that the scaling slope for the amphipods from a spring with fish predators is lower than that of both samples from the fishless springs, though the difference between the Blue and Kanesatake amphipods is not quite significant (although the 95% CI of the former does not overlap the b value of the latter, the reverse is not quite true).
discussions of how antipredator responses may be the result of natural selection, phenotypic plasticity, or both, see A ̊ bjo ̈ rnsson et al. 2004, Kishida et al. 2010, Dennis et al. 2011). Breeding experiments, selection analyses, and environmental manipulations are required to determine the relative importance of these possible causes, some of which are underway. However, our preliminary transplant experiments already suggest that the interpopulation differences in growth scaling that we have observed probably have a genetic component. This is because in all three transplant trials the scaling slope was not significantly different between amphipods cultured in their home spring vs. a transplant spring with a different predator regime (Table 2). Amphipods from the fishless springs (Petersburg and Kanesatake) continued to show indeterminate growth when transplanted into fish springs (Blue and Ell, respectively; Figs. 7A,B, and 8B), whereas amphipods from a fish spring (Blue) still
showed determinate growth in a transplant spring without fish (Petersburg; Figs. 7C and 8B). The transplant procedure also had little or no effect on the elevation of the growth scaling relationships, as represented by the body size adjusted mean growth rate. The significant decrease observed for the Petersburg amphipods transplanted into Blue Spring involved only a slightly lower (3%) adjusted mean growth rate (see Table 2), which may have been the result of subtle seasonal changes, as the transplant study was carried out during late summer and fall, in contrast to the home study, which was carried out during late spring to mid-summer.
Other lines of evidence suggest that the interpopulation differences in ontogenetic scaling of growth and metabolic rates of G. minus are adaptive evolutionary responses (at least in part) to size-selective predation by the visually hunting fish Cottus cognatus. First, C. cognatus has been shown to prey preferentially on large

610 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
 FIG. 8. Relative growth rates (695% CI) of amphipods (Gammarus minus) of different ages and size classes cultured in field enclosures for three weeks either in their (A) home spring or (B) a transplant spring with a different predator regime. Comparisons are made between amphipods that originated in springs with fish (black symbols, Ell and Blue Springs) and those from springs without fish (open symbols, Petersburg and Kanesatake Springs). The horizontal dashed lines indicate zero growth.
amphipods (Newman and Waters 1984). Second, as expected from size-selective predation, adults of G. minus reach smaller maximal sizes in springs with vs. without C. cognatus (Fig. 1; see also Glazier 1999). Third, the metabolic-scaling exponent varies inversely with fish density, and presumably predation intensity (Fig. 3). Fourth, the metabolic-scaling regression lines for the amphipods from the fish springs intersect those of the amphipods from the fishless springs at smaller body sizes as the density of fish (and presumably their predation intensity) increases (see Fig. 2F). This would
be expected if increasing size-selective predation intensity causes greater reductions in the growth (and associated metabolism) of adult amphipods, thus tipping the scaling exponent increasingly downward. Fifth, growth and metabolic rates of small young amphipods are as high or higher in the fish vs. fishless springs (Figs. 2F, 6E, and 8), as would be expected if size-selective predation favored high metabolism in support of rapid early growth to maturity, thus enabling reproduction before being eaten.
Assuming that size-selective predation has affected the growth and metabolic scaling of G. minus, the precise mechanistic causes for this effect still need to be determined. There are three plausible possibilities. First, size-selective mortality may directly favor reduced postmaturational growth so that adults remain small and relatively inconspicuous to visually hunting fish. Second, it may favor higher allocation of energy to early reproduction (as has been observed in brooding females; Glazier 1999), thus leaving less energy for growth. Third, it may favor more secretive behavior in relatively large, conspicuous adults, thus resulting in reduced foraging activity and less energy for growth (cf. Stoks et al. 2003, Brodin and Johansson 2004, Wohlfahrt et al. 2007, Strobbe et al. 2011). And, of course, these factors may be influential in combination. The first and third hypotheses imply that decreases in growth demand in relatively large adult amphipods should decrease the metabolic-scaling exponent, as is observed. Considering the second hypothesis, the effect of reduced postmaturational growth on metabolic rate may be counterbalanced by the higher metabolic costs of increased reproduction. However, this hypothesis may not apply to our study because our estimates of adult metabolic rates involved only males, so as to exclude the effects of egg production by females.
Behavioral activity.—The third hypothesis described in the previous paragraph raises the possibility that the presence of fish may depress the behavioral activity of amphipods, especially those that are large and conspicuous, which may in turn affect the scaling of growth and metabolic rates. This hypothesis is plausible because numerous studies have shown that the presence of fish predators reduces the activity of amphipods (including G. minus) and causes them to take refuge in the sediment (Andersson et al. 1986, Holomuzki and Hoyle 1990,
TABLE 2. Comparisons of the scaling of growth rate between amphipods (Gammarus minus) cultured for three weeks in a home spring vs. a transplant spring with a different predator regime.
  Adjusted log10 means of final body mass
Transplant effect
Transplant 3 body mass effect
   Source
Petersburg Kanesatake Blue
Home
0.957 6 0.018 1.012 6 0.018 0.971 6 0.016
Transplant
0.928 6 0.022 0.958 6 0.022 0.991 6 0.026
df F
1, 192 5.84 1, 197 0.92 1, 172 0.68
P
0.017 0.340 0.412
df F
1, 192 2.63 1, 197 0.90 1, 172 0.03
P
0.106 0.343 0.866
   Notes: Adjusted log10 means of final wet body mass (and 95% CIs; originally measured in mg), transplant (regression elevation) effects, and transplant 3 body mass (regression slope) effects were estimated by ANCOVA, with log10(initial wet body mass) as the covariate. The amphipods from Petersburg, Kanesatake, and Blue Springs were transplanted into Blue, Ell, and Petersburg Springs, respectively.

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 611
Starry et al. 1998, Wooster 1998, A ̊ bjo ̈ rnsson et al. 2000; D. S. Glazier, personal observations). It is also consistent with three further observations in our study system. First, litter processing rates mediated by G. minus and other detritivores vary inversely with fish density (Sangiorgio et al. 2010). Second, the percentage of fat content of relatively conspicuous adults (but not relatively inconspicuous juveniles) of G. minus is significantly lower in population samples from springs with vs. without fish (Fig. 9). Third, body condition (mass per length) generally averages lower in individuals of G. minus from predator-rich vs. predator-poor springs (Basset and Glazier 1995, Glazier 1998). All of the above observations taken together suggest that the presence of predatory fish has inhibited the food ingestion rates of adult G. minus (as has also been observed in large, but not small individuals of Hyalella amphipod populations; see Wellborn 1994b). If so, perhaps reduced food intake and behavioral activity have contributed to the reduced rates of growth and metabolism that have been observed in relatively large adult amphipods in springs with fish (see Figs. 2F and 6E).
However, the effects of differential behavioral activity on the interpopulation differences in growth and metabolic scaling that we measured are likely to be indirect, if important at all in this respect. First, we used nylon mesh to restrict movement and promote sedentary attachment that minimized behavioral activity of amphipods in the respirometers where metabolic rate was estimated. Second, we estimated growth rates in amphipods given food ad libitum in protective enclosures, and thus, direct effects of the presence of fish on feeding activity are likely to have been minimal, as well. Nevertheless, decreased swimming and foraging activity in adult amphipods exposed to fish may be associated with a less developed metabolic system (including reduced sizes and metabolic intensities of various organs and tissues that support activity) that may have affected the scaling of metabolic rate, a hypothesis requiring testing (see also Current overview section).
Other environmental factors and indirect effects.— Perhaps the interpopulation differences in metabolic scaling that we observed are caused by environmental factors that are incidentally associated with the presence vs. absence of fish predators. Although this possibility cannot be entirely ruled out, it seems unlikely because we were not able to identify any other environmental factors in our study springs that could have plausibly caused differential effects on the metabolic rates of small vs. large amphipods that would lead to the observed population differences in the metabolic-scaling exponent. All of the springs have similar physical and chemical properties, including temperature (;108C ), chemical composition (relatively alkaline with near neutral pH), depth (shallow, ,0.5 m), water clarity (high), substrate (a mixture of cobbles, gravel, sand, and silt), and macrophyte coverage (patches of mosses and/
FIG. 9.
males, and adult non-brooding females from four populations of the amphipod Gammarus minus, two inhabiting springs without the predatory fish Cottus cognatus (gray bars, Petersburg and Kanesatake Springs) and two with this fish (black bars, Ell and Blue Springs) (data from Glazier et al. [1992]). ANCOVA comparisons of fat mass (with dry body mass as the covariate) indicate that the adults had significantly lower mean fat levels in the springs with vs. without fish, whereas the juveniles did not show a significant interpopulation difference (F and P values are indicated). Note that the fat content of brooding females is not considered here because it is greatly affected by release of fat-laden eggs into the brood pouch.
or watercress) (see also Glazier and Gooch 1987, Glazier and Deptola 2011).
Another possibility is that the presence of fish predators causes indirect effects on the metabolic scaling of G. minus. For example, predators may induce physiological stress that in turn affects metabolic rate and its scaling with body mass. Accordingly, Sunardi et al. (2007) have shown that various predator cues elicit increased metabolic rates in the fish Pseudorasbora parva apparently as a result of increased internal stress, and not enhanced behavioral activity. Similar predatorinduced increases (and sometimes decreases) in metabolic rate have been observed in other animals (reviewed in Hawlena and Schmitz [2010]). However, stress-related effects are unlikely to explain completely the interpopulation variation of metabolic scaling that we have observed in G. minus for two reasons. First, even if such effects exist in G. minus under natural conditions, it is questionable whether they may persist long enough in predator-free captivity to cause significant changes in our laboratory measurements of metabolic rate. Second, and more importantly, the stress hypothesis (following the results of Sunardi et al. [2007]) predicts that amphipods exposed to predators should exhibit higher metabolic rates than those not exposed, but this is only shown by relatively small, inconspicuous juveniles with relatively low risk to fish predation, and not by larger, more conspicuous adults with high risk to predation, which unexpectedly show decreased metabolic rates (Fig. 2F). As a result, one may modify the stress
 Relative fat content (695% CI) in juveniles, adult

612 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
 FIG. 10. Schematic representation of some hypothetical causes of the differences in metabolic scaling observed between Gammarus minus populations in springs with vs. without visually hunting fish predators. The shallower metabolic-scaling slope of the populations in the fish springs (black line) relative to that of the populations in the fishless springs (gray line) may result from factors that increase the metabolic demand of small young amphipods (e.g., higher prematurational growth rate to ensure early reproduction before being eaten) or that decrease the metabolic demand of large older amphipods (e.g., lower postmaturational growth rate and less swimming and foraging activity, both resulting in less conspicuousness to predatory fish because of a smaller adult size and reduced movement). For more details see the Discussion section Fish predators and the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate.
hypothesis to include stress-related decreases in metabolic rate, but it is not clear how stress may cause both increases and decreases in metabolic rate depending upon age and body size.
Alternatively, one may hypothesize that predation has indirectly affected the metabolic scaling of G. minus by reducing its population density (as appears to have occurred in our study springs; D. S. Glazier, personal observations; also see Wooster 1998, Anteau et al. 2011, Winkelmann et al. 2011), thereby possibly increasing the amount of food available per individual (cf. Reznick et al. 2001). However, this hypothesis predicts that amphipods in springs with fish should have greater body stores (fat content) than those in springs without fish, which is not observed. No significant interpopulation difference in percentage of fat content was found for juveniles, and the adults showed significantly lower fat levels in the fish vs. fishless springs, the opposite of that predicted (Fig. 9). This indirect effects hypothesis is also hampered by not being able to explain why the metabolic rates of small amphipods tend to increase, whereas the metabolic rates of large amphipods tend to decrease in springs with vs. without fish (Fig. 2F).
Current overview.—Although our investigation of metabolic scaling in G. minus has not yet been completed, our current view of the most important factors likely causing the interpopulation differences in metabolic scaling that we have observed is summarized in Fig. 10. A critical observation is that the shallower
metabolic-scaling slope of the populations in the fish vs. fishless springs appears to be due to a tendency for small young amphipods to have relatively high metabolic rates, whereas large older amphipods tend to have relatively low metabolic rates in the presence of fish (Fig. 2F). We suggest that this is because size-selective fish predation has favored high, metabolically demanding growth rates in young amphipods so as to ensure their rapid maturation and early reproduction before they are eaten, but has favored low, metabolically conservative growth rates in mature amphipods (i.e., determinate growth) so that they will remain relatively small and inconspicuous to visually hunting fish. By contrast, in fishless springs G. minus has evolved continuous, metabolically demanding postmaturational growth (i.e., indeterminate growth) presumably because this increases reproductive fitness in both males (larger size confers higher competitive success in obtaining mates; see Glazier 2009b) and females (larger size entails larger body stores and brood pouches, thus enabling greater egg production; see Glazier 2000a, b, 2009b).
Size-selective predation may have also influenced the metabolic scaling of G. minus by favoring a relatively secretive and sedentary lifestyle entailing reduced behavioral activity in relatively large conspicuous adults, which may indirectly reduce their resting metabolic rate because of a lesser need for an athletic physiology to support high levels of activity. Active lifestyles have been shown to be associated with higher rates of resting metabolism in insects (Reinhold 1999). Further investigation of this hypothesis is underway.
Overall, the present study provides evidence that predators may not only affect the morphology, behavior, and life histories of their prey, but also even their metabolic physiology (cf. Sunardi et al. 2007, Hawlena and Schmitz 2010). Furthermore, we have described how these varied responses (including the reduced body size, growth rate, behavioral activity, and metabolic rate of adult G. minus) may be interconnected. In addition, these antipredator responses have probably evolved independently in the three study springs with fish because they are geographically isolated (.10 km apart), and the populations there exhibit significant differences in another predator-related response: the allometry of eye size (see Glazier and Deptola 2011). Similar parallel evolution of various life-history features in multiple isolated populations exposed to fish predators has been observed in Hyalella amphipods (Wellborn et al. 2005, Wellborn and Broughton 2008).
Why does resting metabolic rate generally show negative allometry?
To fully understand the metabolic scaling of G. minus, it is important to know not only why there are population differences (e.g., in response to the varying presence of fish predators), but also why it is generally negatively allometric (scaling slope b , 1) as typically occurs in most animals (Glazier 2005). Even in the

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 613
absence of fish predators, the scaling slope of resting metabolic rate is significantly ,1 (Fig. 3). Here we consider three major possibilities. First, the negative allometry may be primarily the result of internal design features, but the scaling slope may be shifted up or down somewhat by secondary ecological factors (e.g., fish predation). Second, a single pervasive cause or set of similar causes may explain the different degrees of negative allometry observed in the various populations. Third, multiple internal and external factors with varying population-specific effects may cause the different degrees of negative allometry that are observed.
Primary internal constraints with secondary ecological effects?—The general negative allometry of metabolic rate observed in G. minus and most other animals may be the result of internal size-related constraints on resource supply to and waste removal from metabolizing cells. For example, some resource–transport network models predict that the metabolic-scaling exponent should be 3/4 (e.g., West et al. 1997, Banavar et al. 1999, 2010), which is within the 95% confidence intervals of the exponent observed in G. minus in the absence of fish predators (Fig. 3). Perhaps, the geometry of resource–transport networks primarily causes the negative allometry of metabolic rate in G. minus, with fish predation causing smaller secondary effects. Alternatively, the cellular mode of growth may be the primary cause of the negative allometry observed. Our data suggest that cell enlargement and multiplication have contributed approximately equally to body growth, which according to the cell size model (Davison 1955, Kozłowski et al. 2003) predicts a metabolic-scaling slope of 0.833, which is also within the 95% confidence intervals of the exponent observed in G. minus in the absence of fish predators (Fig. 3). The predicted b value of 0.833 is exactly midway between 2/3 and 1, which represent the extreme theoretical possibilities of the cell size model. This model assumes that most metabolic activities occur at cell membranes or depend on resource and waste fluxes occurring across them. Consequently, for geometric reasons, if body growth is entirely due to cell enlargement, b should be 2/3, whereas if body growth is entirely due to cell multiplication, b should be 1. Scaling exponents lower than 2/3 (as observed in the three populations in the fish springs, though significantly so only in the most fish-rich Williamsburg Spring; Fig. 3) may result from additional ecological effects, as already described in the subsection Current overview in Fish predators and the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate.
A single factor causes various degrees of negative allometry?—Perhaps there is a single factor or set of related factors that can explain all of the different levels of negative allometry observed for resting metabolic rate in G. minus (b varying from 0.54 to 0.77). A promising candidate is the ontogeny of growth. Growth makes up a large proportion of the energy budget of developing organisms (Wieser 1994), and since growth rate declines as organisms become
larger, so should the mass-specific metabolic rate (cf. Riisga ̊ rd 1998, Glazier 2005, Czarnołeski et al. 2008, Peng et al. 2010). This effect could help explain (at least partially) why metabolic rate is negatively allometric in populations from springs both with and without fish predators. This hypothesis is supported by the log-log linear, negatively allometric scaling of both growth and metabolic rate in all of the study populations, and by the less steep scaling of both growth and metabolic rate in the populations from the fish springs, as compared to those from the fishless springs.
Another possible pervasive effect may be ontogenetic changes in body composition (Glazier 2005). For example, as amphipods and other crustaceans grow, the proportion of their body mass that is metabolically inert exoskeleton may increase (i.e., show positive allometry, with the scaling slope . 1), thus possibly contributing to the negative allometry of metabolic rate (see Glazier 1991, Glazier and Calow 1992, Simcˇicˇ and Brancelj 2003). However, this may not always be true: For example, in all five of our study populations the scaling exponent for ash mass (an index of exoskeleton mass) was never significantly greater than 1 (i.e., never showed significant positive allometry; see Fig. 4B). Furthermore, among all of the study populations, the scaling of metabolic rate showed no consistent relationship with the scaling of ash mass (compare Figs. 3 and 4B). Assuming that ash mass is a reliable indicator of exoskeleton mass, these results strongly suggest that the scaling of exoskeleton mass has had little or no effect on the scaling of metabolic rate in G. minus.
A study of the scaling of chitinous mass (another index of exoskeleton mass) in the amphipod G. fossarum also shows that the scaling of exoskeleton mass has little effect on the metabolic-scaling exponent (b). In this species, b did not differ significantly whether total wet mass or non-chitinous mass was used as a measure of body size (Simcˇicˇ and Brancelj 2003). Therefore, Simcˇicˇ and Brancelj (2003) suggested that the positive allometry of other tissues with low metabolic demand (e.g., fat) may be responsible for the negative allometry of metabolic rate in amphipods. This is possible, but our results suggest that the scaling of fat content and metabolic rate are unrelated in G. minus. The populations in the fish springs show little or no age-specific increases in the percentage of fat content (Fig. 9), and yet their allometric scaling of metabolic rate is still strongly negative (Fig. 3). Furthermore, although the populations from the fishless springs show greater age-related increases in fat mass than those from the fish springs (Fig. 9), they exhibit steeper metabolic-scaling slopes (Figs. 2F and 3), which is the opposite of that expected.
Multiple internal and external factors with varying population-specific effects?—Some theoretical models suggest that multiple internal and/or external factors may influence metabolic scaling (reviewed in Glazier 2005). These factors may exert their effects by influencing either resource supply or demand or both. For example, according to the metabolic-level boundaries (MLB) hypothesis, resource supply and demand may

614 DOUGLAS S. GLAZIER ET AL.
Ecological Monographs Vol. 81, No. 4
both be important, with their relative effects depending on the overall metabolic level of a species (Glazier 2005, 2008, 2010). This hypothesis posits that the scaling of sustainable metabolic rate is limited by two extreme boundaries: an upper boundary at high levels of resting metabolic rate that involves surface area-related limits on resource uptake and waste removal (b ; 2/3) and a lower boundary at low metabolic levels that is dictated by volume-related resource demand for tissue maintenance (b ; 1). The MLB hypothesis predicts that b should be inversely related to metabolic level, which has been reported for both intraand interspecific metabolic-scaling relationships in animals (Glazier 2005, 2008, 2009d, 2010, Ohlberger et al. 2007, Killen et al. 2010), plants (Glazier 2010, Hoque et al. 2010), and unicellular organisms (Glazier 2009c). Given that amphipods and many other crustaceans have intermediate levels of metabolism, compared to other animals (see Glazier 2010), the MLB hypothesis predicts that G. minus should exhibit a metabolic-scaling exponent between 2/3 and 1, which it does in the two fishless springs (b 1⁄4 0.76 to 0.77). However, the amphipods in the three fish springs display b values that are significantly lower, and in one spring significantly lower than 2/3, an extreme scaling exponent for one of the boundary limits of the MLB hypothesis (see Fig. 3), even though all five study populations have similar metabolic levels (the midpoints of their scaling regressions are close and are near the crossover points of four of the five populations; see Fig. 2F). However, the MLB hypothesis allows various internal and external factors to cause extensive variation in b between the postulated upper and lower boundary limits. Deviations (even outside the range of 2/3to 1power scaling) may be caused if either surface area or tissue resource demand does not scale as M2/3 or M1, respectively (Glazier 2010). For example, we have provided evidence in this report that the resource demand for growth changes with age and body size in G. minus, and that the ontogenetic scaling exponent for growth shifts downward in the presence of fish predators. This disproportionate, size-related change in growth rate, and associated tissue resource demand, may thus help account for the relatively low metabolicscaling exponents observed in amphipods from the fish springs, as previously explained in the subsection Scaling of growth rate of the section Fish predators and the ontogenetic scaling of resting metabolic rate.
We hope that further research using our study system and other appropriate field or laboratory systems with careful experimental and/or comparative controls will facilitate the evaluation of the relative importance of various theoretical explanations for the allometric scaling of metabolic rate.
General conclusions and implications
Recently, many studies of metabolic scaling have focused on comparisons of different species or groups of species, often with an aim to find evidence for or against
a universal scaling law (e.g., Bokma 2004, Savage et al. 2004, Glazier 2005, 2010, White et al. 2007, Makarieva et al. 2008, Capellini et al. 2010, DeLong et al. 2010, Isaac and Carbone 2010, Killen et al. 2010). However, intraspecific comparisons of metabolic-scaling relationships, especially among conspecific populations exposed to varying environmental conditions, have been relatively neglected in recent years, despite the advantages that they offer for incisive experimental and comparative analyses of the causes of metabolic scaling (as suggested by Glazier 2005, 2006, Vaca and White 2010). Glazier (2005) reviewed many older studies that examined the effects of various environmental and physiological factors (including temperature, salinity, oxygen availability, water availability, light intensity, season, nutritional level, parasitic infection, age, activity level, reproductive state, and so on) on the metabolicscaling exponent (b) within conspecific populations (more recent, notable studies include Ohlberger et al. 2007, Glazier 2009a, Hoque et al. 2010, Vaca and White 2010). However, comparisons of metabolic scaling among conspecific populations are rare (e.g., Barlow 1961, Walsh and Somero 1981, McFeeters et al. 2011), and to our knowledge detailed analyses of the causes of variation in b at this level have not been carried out previously. Therefore, a notable aspect of the present work is that it not only documents significant variation in b among conspecific populations, but also provides a likely, testable mechanism causing this variation (i.e., the presence vs. absence of size-selective fish predation mediated by effects on the ontogeny of growth, a metabolically expensive process). It also adds to the growing evidence that there is no single universal scaling law of metabolism: Significant variation in b is pervasive at all taxonomic levels, from individual organisms and conspecific populations to different species and higher taxa (see also Glazier 2005, 2010).
Another noteworthy implication of this study is that it shows how and probably why an extrinsic (ecological) factor (presence of fish predators) can affect the metabolic-scaling exponent. Most theoretical models of metabolic scaling have emphasized the effects of intrinsic factors (e.g., surface area–volume relationships of bodies or their component cells, the physical properties of resource–transport networks, subcellular molecular processes, and so on; see reviews by Agutter and Wheatley 2004, Glazier 2005, 2010, Agutter and Tuszynski 2011). This study supports the view that both intrinsic and extrinsic factors (and their interplay) must be considered to achieve a truly synthetic theory of the scaling of metabolism and other energy-dependent biological processes (as promoted by Glazier 2005, 2010). To do so will require examining the possibility of multidirectional causal pathways, not only from metabolism to various ecological processes (as emphasized by the influential metabolic theory of ecology, MTE; Brown et al. 2004), but also from ecological factors to metabolism (as emphasized by an emerging

November 2011 ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON METABOLIC SCALING 615
ecological theory of metabolism, ETM; see Glazier 2005, 2010, Killen et al. 2010).
As a heuristic example, consider how metabolism and growth may be interrelated. According to the MTE, body design limits on resource supply constrain the sizespecific rate of metabolism, which in turn dictates the rate and ontogenetic patterns of growth and development (as formulated in the ontogenetic growth models of West et al. 2001, Hou et al. 2008, Moses et al. 2008). However, according to the ETM, ecological factors may influence the rate and body size scaling of growth (and other vital activities), which may alter the rate and scaling of metabolism through their effects on resource demand. We suggest that a complete mechanistic understanding of the scaling of growth and metabolism will require detailed knowledge of how these processes have co-evolved and co-adjusted functionally and developmentally in a mutually interactive way. Not only may body size-constrained resource supply affect the rate of metabolism and thereby growth (MTE), but also the ecologically mediated resource demand of growth may affect the rate of metabolism that is required (ETM). Ecological effects on growth may also affect body size, and in turn its effects on metabolic rate. The MTE and ETM are in some ways mirror images that both require further testing and development, if we are to build a general theory that successfully explains the extensive variation in metabolic scaling seen in nature.
This last point raises the importance of using the method of multiple working hypotheses (Chamberlin 1965) in the field of biological scaling, which unfortunately has been largely neglected (Glazier 2005, O’Connor et al. 2007). Only recently have other studies appeared that test multiple models of metabolic scaling (e.g., Isaac and Carbone 2010). This approach has great potential for advancing our understanding of metabolic scaling in a more critical and productive way than by testing single models in isolation, as has been the norm.
To close, recent empirical and theoretical research suggests that metabolic scaling is highly malleable physiologically, developmentally, and evolutionarily, and that we still have a long way to go before we fully understand this variation, both in terms of proximate (functional) and ultimate (adaptive/evolutionary) mechanisms. Intraspecific studies such as this one, along with larger scale comparative investigations of metabolicscaling patterns at higher taxonomic levels in relation to various physical, biochemical, physiological, and ecological factors, should greatly aid us in this effort. As a result, our understanding of the scaling of other metabolically fueled biological and ecological processes should also improve.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank N. W. Pelkey and T. L. Righetti for help with the statistical analyses; J. J. Borrelli, J. Doughty, and M. T. Horne for field and laboratory assistance; R. N. Finn for suggesting that we should examine the allometry of exoskeleton mass; D. Christian, R. D. Morningstar, J. Painter, the Petersburg
Borough and the MeadWestvaco Corporation for access to their springs; and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This research was supported by grants from the Kresge Foundation and William J. von Liebig Foundation awarded to Juniata College.
 ̊  ̊
 ̊
LITERATURE CITED
