  Inbreeding Promotes Female Promiscuity
Lukasz Michalczyk et al. Science 333, 1739 (2011); DOI: 10.1126/science.1207314
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.
   If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by clicking here.
Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines here.
The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of June 8, 2012 ):
Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/333/6050/1739.full.html
Supporting Online Material can be found at: http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2011/09/21/333.6050.1739.DC1.html
A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/333/6050/1739.full.html#related
This article cites 26 articles, 6 of which can be accessed free: http://www.sciencemag.org/content/333/6050/1739.full.html#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see: http://www.sciencemag.org/content/333/6050/1739.full.html#related-urls
This article appears in the following subject collections: Evolution http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/evolution
 Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2011 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012

 factor (~10%). Further sources of uncertainty of both t and E are the settings applied for spatial integration (~10%) (fig. S2) and the choice of wind data (~30%). Total errors of t and E are estimated as the quadratic sum of these uncertainties, assuming them to be independent (24).
Our method for determining NOx lifetimes and emissions is generally applicable for any strong, localized source. Figure 3 compares the resulting NOx emissions to the EDGAR (V4.1) emission inventory (25, 26) for the year 2005 for a set of (mega)cities and one other strong point source, the Four Corners (27) power plants, which have passed an automated performance check (see SOM text and table S1). In addition, the derived mean lifetimes are color-coded in the scatterplot.
Despite the large uncertainties on the order of 50% for both our results and EDGAR emissions (7), the derived emissions are generally in good agreement with the EDGAR inventory. One possible reason for the deviations is that, due to the short lifetimes, our method is only sensitive to daytime emissions (see SOM text and fig. S4), whereas EDGAR emissions are 24-hour annual averages. For Riyadh, however, where our fit performs best, resulting emissions are higher by a factor of 3. This indicates that EDGAR NOx emissions are too low for Riyadh, though the reason for this is not yet clear; however, from a trend analysis of the satellite observations, we can exclude that this discrepancy is just due to emission changes since the EDGAR reference year of 2005.
The simultaneously derived daytime lifetimes are almost free of a priori assumptions or model input, as they are based on the relative downwind patterns. They are in the range of 2.3 to 6.4 hours (with typical uncertainties of 40 to 60%), in good agreement with prior measurements (16, 17). This range constrains the average OH concentration to be between about 10 × 106 and 4 × 106 molecules/cm3. This directly reflects the oxidizing capacity within the fresh urban plume, which is
also relevant for the depletion of other pollutants like CO, SO2, and volatile organic compounds. An additional analysis of seasonal mean lifetimes and emissions generally reveals similar results (fig. S3). But at higher latitudes (Moscow) in winter, when heterogeneous night-time reactions of NOx (i.e., conversion to HNO3 via NO3 and N2O5) are probably the dominating loss processes, the derived lifetimes are considerably
longer (8 hours).
Owing to the global coverage of satellite ob-
servations, our method can be applied to various major “point sources” such as megacities around the world. With the ongoing time series of current and especially future (geostationary) satellite instruments with better spatial resolution, our method can serve as a robust, independent tool to validate NOx emission inventories of megacities, and might also be applied to other trace gases in the future as retrievals continue to improve.
References and Notes
1. J. H. Seinfeld, S. N. Pandis, Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics (Wiley, New York, ed. 2, 2006).
2. In this study, we define “megacity” as a city with more than 5 million inhabitants, following the definition used within the MEGAPOLI project (http://megapoli.dmi. dk/nlet/MEGAPOLI_NewsLet01.pdf)
3. M. Molina, L. Molina, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc. 54, 644 (2004).
4. M. G. Lawrence, T. M. Butler, J. Steinkamp, B. R. Gurjar, J. Lelieveld, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 7, 3969 (2007).
5. D. Butler, Nature 455, 142 (2008).
6. T. M. Butler et al., Atmos. Environ. 42, 703 (2008). 7. EDGAR, available at http://themasites.pbl.nl/en/
themasites/edgar/documentation/uncertainties/index.html. 8. C. Leue et al., J. Geophys. Res. 106, (D6), 5493
(2001).
9. R. V. Martin et al., J. Geophys. Res. 108, 4537 (2003).
10. I. B. Konovalov, M. Beekmann, A. Richter, J. P. Burrows, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 6, 1747 (2006).
11. A. Richter, J. P. Burrows, H. Nüss, C. Granier, U. Niemeier, Nature 437, 129 (2005).
12. S. Beirle, U. Platt, M. Wenig, T. Wagner, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 3, 2225 (2003).
13. S. Beirle, U. Platt, R. von Glasow, M. Wenig, T. Wagner, Geophys. Res. Lett. 31, L18102 (2004).
REPORTS
14. R. Martin, Atmos. Environ. 42, 7823 (2008).
15. Other loss processes are, e.g., wet and dry deposition and
the formation of peroxyacetylnitrate (PAN).
16. Either explicitly, or implicitly via inverse modeling
approaches.
17. C. W. Spicer, Science 215, 1095 (1982).
18. T. B. Ryerson et al., J. Geophys. Res. 103, 22569 (1998). 19. T. Kunhikrishnan et al., Atmos. Environ. 38, 581 (2004). 20. Because the respective satellites have repeat cycles of
only 1 to 6 days, it is generally not possible to track a particular air mass, as done with in situ aircraft transects. Instead, spatial patterns of temporally averaged (seasonal/multi-annual) NO2 tropospheric columns have been analyzed under special conditions, resulting in lifetimes of 4 hours (12) up to a day (7, 17). The latter estimates are biased toward high values because they ignore effects of the satellite’s coarse spatial resolution.
21. P. Levelt et al., IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens. 44, 1093 (2006).
22. K. F. Boersma et al., Atmos. Chem. Phys. 7, 2103 (2007). 23. ECMWF, available at http://www.ecmwf.int/research/
ifsdocs/CY33r1/index.html.
24. Detailed methods are available as supporting material on
Science Online.
25. EDGAR, available at http://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.php. 26. Though specific emission inventories exist for various
megacities (with highly variable quality), we present a comparison to the global EDGAR inventory, which is widely used in global atmospheric chemistry models.
27. Available at http://www.pnm.com/systems/4c.htm. Acknowledgments: The research leading to these results received funding from the European Union’s Seventh
Framework Programme FP/2007-2011 within the project MEGAPOLI (grant 212520). We acknowledge the free use of tropospheric NO2 column data from the OMI sensor from www.temis.nl. We thank the ECMWF for providing wind fields. EDGAR NOx emissions for 2005 were provided by the European Commission, Joint Research Centre ( JRC)–Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL) (EDGAR version 4.1, http://edgar.jrc.ec. europa.eu/, 2010). We thank S. Dörner for valuable assistance in processing ECMWF data.
Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/333/6050/1737/DC1 Methods
SOM Text
Table S1
Figs. S1 to S4
2 May 2011; accepted 3 August 2011 10.1126/science.1207824
offspring by promoting fertilization success of those sperm carrying more compatible paternal haplotypes (4, 5), polyandry may be favored. Studies of hybridizing species reveal the rapid evolution of molecular mechanisms that avoid fertilization by genetically less compatible sperm haplotypes (6). Furthermore, measures of reproductive dynamics within a species show that equivalent mechanisms exist at the gamete level to favor fertilization compatibility (7–12). These mechanisms may explain the evolution of polyandry, even in the face of costs to females that
1School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK. 2ETH Zurich, Institute of Integrative Biology, Universitätsstrasse 16, CHN J 11, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland. 3Island Ecology and Evolution Research Group (IPNA-CSIC), C/Astrofísico Francisco Sánchez 3, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: m.gage@uea.ac.uk
 Inbreeding Promotes Female Promiscuity
Łukasz Michalczyk,1 Anna L. Millard,1 Oliver Y. Martin,1,2 Alyson J. Lumley,1 Brent C. Emerson,1,3 Tracey Chapman,1 Matthew J. G. Gage1*
The widespread phenomenon of polyandry (mating by females with multiple males) is an evolutionary puzzle, because females can sustain costs from promiscuity, whereas full fertility can be provided by a single male. Using the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum, we identify major fitness benefits of polyandry to females under inbreeding, when the risks of fertilization by incompatible male haplotypes are especially high. Fifteen generations after inbred populations had passed through genetic bottlenecks, we recorded increased levels of female promiscuity compared with noninbred controls, most likely due to selection from prospective fitness gains through polyandry. These data illustrate how this common mating pattern can evolve if population genetic bottlenecks increase the risks of fitness depression due to fertilization by sperm carrying genetically incompatible haplotypes.
 It is unknown why females in the majority of species mate with multiple males (1, 2) particularly when complete fertility can be provided by a single male, no direct benefits come
from males apart from fertilizing sperm, and promiscuity can incur substantial costs for females (3). However, if postmating selection enables females to gain genetic benefits for their
www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 333 23 SEPTEMBER 2011 1739
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012

 REPORTS
result from mating with multiple males (3), because mating with multiple males increases the chances of insemination by compatible males or sperm. Inbreeding is one situation where malefemale incompatibility is prevalent, as matings between genetically incompatible relatives can lead to fitness depression in offspring through the increased expression of deleterious homozygous recessives and/or a loss of heterozygote advantage (13). Inbreeding is now recognized to occur in natural populations (14), and if mechanisms exist to promote the fusion of sperm and egg that carry haplotypes with higher additive or nonadditive fitness, then positive selection for the evolution of polyandry could occur.
To test the prediction that female promiscuity could be selected for after genetic bottlenecking (15), we first measured the effects of polyandry on reproductive fitness in replicate inbred and noninbred populations of Tribolium castaneum red flour beetles. T. castaneum, like many taxa, undergoes rapid population fluctuations, contracting to the extent that single females could establish kin-structured colonies where related offspring are then at risk of inbreeding (15, 16). We generated 33 replicate inbred lines through eight generations of sibling-to-sibling matings (F = 0.83) (17) and compared them to a noninbred parental stock control maintained at high
Fig. 1. Polyandry rescues female reproductive fitness within inbred populations. Box plot showing medians (with interquartile, quartile ranges, outliers, and extreme outliers) for fitness of females mated for 7 days either to one (monandry) or five (polyandry) males of their own population. Female fitness is a composite measure of early lifetime reproduction and the viability of those offspring (18). Values below quartile whiskers represent sample sizes [number of lines (inbred) or replicates (control) per treatment]. Results identified a significant overall effect of inbreeding on female fitness (F1,91 = 28.5, P < 0.001), a significant effect of mating pattern (F1,91 = 6.75, P = 0.011), and a significant interaction (F1,91 = 5.89, P = 0.017) (table S1).
effective population size (Ne > 1000). We measured female reproductive fitness in the inbred and noninbred treatments after mating them with either one (monandry) or five (polyandry) males of their own populations (18). Reproductive fitness was quantified as the product of total adult offspring emerging from eggs laid over their first oviposition week after matings and the survival longevity of those offspring under a simple mortality assay (18). Such composite measures of earlylife fitness are more meaningful than single fitness estimators (19). We found that under normal, noninbred conditions the female mating pattern did not influence reproductive fitness (Fig. 1 and fig. S1) (20). Within inbred populations, monandrous females suffered substantial inbreeding depression, with reproductive fitness half that of females from noninbred populations. However, females from inbred populations that mated polyandrously showed higher reproductive fitness and were at levels comparable to females from the noninbred control populations (Fig. 1, table S1, and fig. S1) (18). Under normal noninbred conditions in T. castaneum, polyandrous mating creates a selective load that must be overcome by females (21). Our results suggest that when populations become inbred, female
promiscuity becomes beneficial and effectively doubles a female’s reproductive fitness compared with monandry.
We investigated the mechanisms facilitating the avoidance of inbreeding depression under monogamy through polyandry and whether the benefit arose through maternal or offspring fitness. We were able to exclude the potential for fertilizing sperm limitation, because assays showed that inbred and noninbred male fertility were identical across 140 days of oviposition after mating with control outbred females (22). Our findings also do not result from reduced maternal output or allocation under inbreeding (23): Fecundity of females mated to single males of their own populations showed no difference between the control and inbred treatments (table S2), so mating pattern did not influence maternal fitness. However, egg hatching success was significantly reduced within inbred populations (table S2), and separate analyses of the two key components contributing to our measure of female reproductive fitness in the inbred populations showed that the number of viable offspring reaching adult eclosion was most strongly affected by polyandry [monandrous inbreds: 25.3 T 4.6 (N = 21 lines); polyandrous inbreds: 50.9 T 3.5 (N = 12 lines);
  1740
23 SEPTEMBER 2011 VOL 333 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Fig. 2. Previously bottlenecked populations show more promiscuous female mating patterns. Females with an evolutionary history of inbreeding show elevated promiscuity in mating behaviors compared with noninbred controls when presented with a continuous series of 10 virgin control males (18). Means and standard errors show that females from previously inbred lines are quicker to accept mating with new males (A), allow longer copulations (B), engage in more matings (C), and spend more of the observation time in copula (D). Values below standard error whiskers represent sample sizes (lines) × females assayed per line. Results of Mann-Whitney U tests for independent samples are displayed within each graph, using line means as independent data points in the analyses.
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012

 t(31) = 4.43, r = 0.62, P < 0.001]. Surviving longevity (days) of those offspring as adults showed a similar but nonsignificant pattern [monandrous inbreds: 4.7 T 0.7 (N = 21 lines); polyandrous inbreds: 5.7 T 0.3 (N = 12 lines); t(28) = 1.269, r = 0.23, P < 0.215]. The results suggest that the observed inbreeding depression arises through specific incompatibility between individual inbred males and females, leading to reduced offspring fitness through lower viability. This incompatibility can be avoided by promoting sperm competition and postcopulatory selection for preferential insemination, storage, or fertilization by sperm conferring greater fitness.
We have recently shown that these levels of inbreeding, although not influencing male fertility per se, do indeed reduce T. castaneum sperm competitiveness by an average of 25% against noninbred males (22). Our promotion of sperm competition under polyandry could therefore allow postcopulatory selection of sperm carrying male genotypes that are less compromised by inbreeding depression, explaining the offspring fitness improvement that we see in the polyandrous condition (4, 5). In addition, any mechanisms that females have evolved to promote the fusion of compatible sperm and egg haplotypes will be especially important under risks from inbreeding (7–12). In field crickets, sperm from a female’s siblings are not preferentially stored (12) as a means to avoid inbreeding. Only 4% of a single ejaculate can be accommodated in the spermatheca in T. castaneum (24), resulting in intense postcopulatory selection on those sperm to successfully enter this fertilization store.
Our interpretations rest on the assumption that greater genetic variation exists between five inbred male siblings compared with one and that this variation is linked to sperm competitiveness or insemination success. Our inbreeding design theoretically reduced heterozygosity by 83%, compared with the parental population (17), resulting in relatively low allelic diversity and reducing the additive genetic variation in inbred populations. However, population bottlenecks and inbreeding may increase heritable variation above theoretical expectations by the conversion of nonadditive genetic variance (e.g., epistatic interactions) into additive genetic variance (25). This may explain the significantly greater betweencross variation in reproductive fitness we observed for the monandrous treatment in the inbred lines. Moreover, epigenetic signals may provide an additional source of between-individual (26) or within-ejaculate variation (27). Whatever the mechanism or origin of the signal, we expect that the relative variance in between-cross fitness of the inbred populations is lower under polyandry compared with monandry because polyandry allows the production of embryos and offspring from a more compatible subpopulation of sperm or males. Our results indeed support this hypothesis (compare box-plot variances for inbred crosses on Fig. 1 and fig. S1; Levene’s test: F = 7.294, P = 0.011).
We then tested whether genetic bottlenecks select for an increase in polyandry because, under these inbreeding conditions, promiscuous T. castaneum females will contribute more surviving offspring to successive generations. We increased adult population size to 40 in our inbred and noninbred experimental lines and allowed them to reproduce over successive generations without mating constraint between the 20 males and 20 females (18). Fifteen generations after the cessation of inbreeding (18), we measured whether female mating pattern had changed relative to the outbred controls, using an assay that presented individual females with a continuous sequence of 10 control males, one male at a time, each of which has the capacity to mate multiple times. Females will resist frequent male mounting attempts by walking away or rolling onto their sides or back and depressing their abdomen so males cannot achieve genital intromission. Under normal, noninbred conditions, experimental evolution shows that females bear a reproductive fitness load when interacting and mating with 10 such males (21).
Female promiscuity was significantly higher in populations that had previously experienced genetic bottlenecks, compared with outbred controls (Fig. 2). Females from populations with a history of inbreeding had a shorter latency to mate with each new male, allowed longer matings (which correlate with successful sperm transfer) (28), and mated more frequently. Together, this resulted in a significantly greater proportion of the trial time in copula. Thus, female promiscuity was selected upon and promoted after inbreeding compared with the noninbred controls. In support of hypotheses that inbreeding can convert nonadditive genetic variation into greater heritable variation (25), we also find that, in addition to significant shifts in mean trait values, variation in three out of the four female mating behavior traits assayed was significantly greater across bottlenecked populations compared with nonbottlenecked controls (18) (Fig. 2). Parallel assays of female physical ability suggest that the inbreeding episode 15 generations before testing had not compromised female capacity to resist multiple matings, nor was their vitality impacted. Females from the bottlenecked populations were faster at completing a vertical climb equivalent to ~300 body lengths [ previously inbred females: 78T1s(N=15lines);controlfemales:92T3s (N = 15 lines); Mann-Whitney U-test: Z = 3.320, r = 0.61, P < 0.001]. Similar results were found for an assay of adult survival time under starvation [previously inbred females: 14.7 T 0.3 days (N = 15 lines); control females: 13.6 T 0.5 days (N = 15 lines); Mann-Whitney U-test: Z = 2.018, r = 0.37, P = 0.044]. These results suggest that previous inbreeding episodes may have selected for individuals with improved vitality and stamina, or perhaps a stronger dispersal drive (29), supporting our female mating behavior assays as being representative indicators of female motivation to resist or accept promiscuity.
REPORTS
Our results are consistent with findings that the female remating rate in Drosophila pseudoobscura increased to avoid fertilization by males carrying a deleterious sex ratio distorter (30). Because female mating patterns may be in an evolutionary “arms race” with that of males (31), polyandry may be subject to relatively rapid selection when the specific conditions that determine the balance between costs of sexual conflict versus benefits of promiscuity are altered. It is even conceivable that genetic (or epigenetic) indicators of individual inbreeding could become established in lineages that repeatedly experience genetic bottlenecking (25, 26), allowing immediate modifications in female mating behavior as soon as inbreeding occurs. Whatever the route to this change in reproductive behavior, our findings illustrate that conditions exist where it clearly benefits females to promote polyandry and that these conditions can then generate a rapid change in the optimal mating pattern.
References and Notes
www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 333 23 SEPTEMBER 2011 1741
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012

 REPORTS
Acknowledgments: We thank R. Beeman and the Stored Product Insect Research Unit for providing Tribolium stocks, and C. Fricke, A. Bretman, and the referees and editors
for manuscript improvements. Funded by the Natural Environment Research Council, the University of East Anglia, and the Swiss National Science Foundation. Data sets for all
assays described in this paper are available in the DRYAD data repository under http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.2cn83.
Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/333/6050/1739/DC1 Materials and Methods
Fig. S1
Tables S1 and S2 References
21 April 2011; accepted 25 July 2011 10.1126/science.1207314
exclusively on male bees for cross-fertilization and that male bees depended exclusively on orchid hosts for fragrance acquisition (and thus for access to mates) (15). However, recent observations suggest that although orchids do typically depend on euglossine bees for reproduction, male bees may obtain fragrance compounds similar to those produced by orchids from other hosts, including fungi, leaves, and rotting vegetation (14, 16). Hence, it remains unclear whether coevolution shaped the mutualism between orchids and bees (14, 17).
We reconstructed the phylogenetic relationships of Euglossini by sequencing ~ 4.0 kb of nuclear (EF1-a, ArgK, and Pol-II ) and mitochondrial (CO1) DNA from 138 taxa sampled across the neotropical region (18, 19). To estimate absolute divergence times among euglossine bee lineages, we used Bayesian relaxedand strict-clock methods (20) and four different fossil calibrations (19). Our phylogenetic and dating analyses resolved most of the relationships within and between orchid bee lineages, recovered all genera as monophyletic, and indicated that euglossine bees shared a most recent common ancestor that lived during the Eocene-Oligocene, 34 to 38 (T4) Ma (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). This age estimate concords with those obtained by previous studies (3, 18).
To infer the phylogenetic relationships of euglossine-pollinated orchids and thereby establish bee-orchid associations, we collected orchid pollinaria directly from male bees captured in the field. We used synthetic fragrance baits to attract and screen >7000 individual bees (from >130 species; fig. S1). From these, we recovered a total of 193 pollinaria attached to ~ 40 bee species (figs. S2 to S6) and successfully sequenced ~3.0 kb of nuclear ribosomal (ITS) and chloroplast (YCF1) DNA from 148 samples.
Combined morphological and molecular data revealed that these samples comprised ~80 orchid species (13%) and 18 genera (51%), three of which had not been previously reported to exhibit male-euglossine pollination (table S2). Our phylogenetic analyses recovered three main clades of euglossine-pollinated orchids (Catasetinae, Stanhopeinae, and Zygopetalinae) and resolved most of the relationships within and between genera (Fig. 1B and figs. S7 and S8). We incorporated additional sequence data (19) of closely related orchids exhibiting food-deceptive pollination modes and confirmed that the three lineages of euglossine-pollinated orchids do not form a monophyletic clade (Fig. 1C) (21, 22). Thus, a likelihood ancestral state reconstruction analysis suggested that switches from food-deceptive ancestors to male-euglossine pollination resulted in at least three independent radiations (Fig. 1C).
 Asynchronous Diversification in a Specialized Plant-Pollinator Mutualism
Santiago R. Ramírez,1,2* Thomas Eltz,3 Mikiko K. Fujiwara,1 Günter Gerlach,4 Benjamin Goldman-Huertas,1† Neil D. Tsutsui,2 Naomi E. Pierce1
Most flowering plants establish mutualistic associations with insect pollinators to facilitate sexual reproduction. However, the evolutionary processes that gave rise to these associations remain poorly understood. We reconstructed the times of divergence, diversification patterns, and interaction networks of a diverse group of specialized orchids and their bee pollinators. In contrast to a scenario of coevolution by race formation, we show that fragrance-producing orchids originated at least three times independently after their fragrance-collecting bee mutualists. Whereas orchid diversification has apparently tracked the diversification of orchids’ bee pollinators, bees appear to have depended on the diverse chemical environment of neotropical forests. We corroborated this apparent asymmetrical dependency by simulating co-extinction cascades in real interaction networks that lacked reciprocal specialization. These results suggest that the diversification of insect-pollinated angiosperms may have been facilitated by the exploitation of preexisting sensory biases of insect pollinators.
The rapid diversification of angiosperms during the mid-Cretaceous, 90 to 125 million years ago (Ma), is often linked to mutualistic interactions with insect pollinators (1). Although fossil evidence suggests that generalist insect pollinators were present before the radiation of angiosperms (1, 2), the more specialized flower-visiting (anthophilous) insects appear to have diversified synchronously with flowering plants (1–3). Today, more than 80% of angiosperms exhibit adaptations for insect pollination (4), and thus most terrestrial ecosystems depend on insect pollination services. However, our understanding of how plant-pollinator mutualisms evolved remains limited.
Because free-living mutualisms are embedded in complex webs of species interactions, understanding how adaptations emerge from—and contribute to—mutualistic associations remains a challenge in evolutionary biology (5). Darwin used coevolution (the idea that adaptive traits evolve by reciprocal selection) to explain and predict the existence of specialized traits exhibited by moth-orchid mutualisms in Madagascar (6). However, whereas reciprocal selection is now widely accepted as a driver of co-adaptation in antagonistic associations (e.g., between hosts and par-
1Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 2Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 3Department of Animal Ecology, Evolution and Biodiversity, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany. 4Botanischer Garten MünchenNymphenburg, Menzinger Str. 65, 80638 München, Germany.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: sramirez@post.harvard.edu
†Present address: Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
asites), its role in free-living mutualisms such as plant-pollinator associations remains unclear (7, 8). Because coevolution requires adaptive traits to evolve nearly simultaneously in both interacting lineages, we applied molecular phylogenetic techniques, molecular clock methods, chemical analyses, and network theory to infer whether reciprocal selection or one-sided selection shaped the evolution of a specialized plant-pollinator mutualism.
More than 200 species of euglossine bees in the neotropical region pollinate thousands of plant species while foraging for nectar, pollen, and resins (9, 10). Additionally, male euglossine bees exhibit unique adaptations, such as specialized hind-leg pockets, for the acquisition and accumulation of fragrance compounds from flowers and other sources (11). During courtship display, male euglossine bees expose these fragrance mixtures. Although the full function of these fragrances has not been demonstrated, they are clearly involved in sexual selection, presumably by enabling species-specific recognition and/or acting as a signal of male fitness (11). The chemical composition of these fragrances evolves rapidly during lineage diversification, and one result may be the maintenance of reproductive isolation among closely related bee lineages (12). All species of euglossine bees exhibit these traits (10).
More than 600 species of orchids—equivalent to 10% of the neotropical Orchidaceae—have evolved adaptations for male euglossine pollination. Euglossine-pollinated orchids produce attractive volatile compounds (terpenes and aromatics), exhibit intricate mechanisms for the attachment of pollinaria (pollen masses) on male bees (Fig. 1A), and lack additional floral rewards such as nectar, pollen, or pseudopollen (13, 14). It was previously thought that orchids depended
 1742
23 SEPTEMBER 2011 VOL 333 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012
