   Molecular Ecology (2012) 21, 554–561 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05234.x
Mechanisms of kin discrimination inferred from pedigrees and the spatial distribution of mates
PETER M. WASER*, MELISSA L. BERNING† and ALLISON PFEIFER*
*Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA, †College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, West Lafayette IN 47907, USA
Abstract
Where animals avoid inbreeding, different mechanisms of kin discrimination can leave different ‘signatures’ in the patterns of observed mate relationship. For example, consider a species with no paternal care. If a female avoids mating with familiar individuals, one would expect a deficit of offspring whose parents are maternal half-siblings, but paternal half-siblings would be unfamiliar with each other and thus have offspring at the frequency expected by chance. If spatial cues are used to avoid inbreeding, a female would be expected to produce few offspring with males (even unrelated males) living near her birth site. We searched for these and other signatures with data from a long-term study of banner-tailed kangaroo rats, Dipodomys spectabilis, in Arizona, USA, using a combination of intensive censusing, mapping of available dens, microsatellite-based parentage determination, and a randomization routine that determines the numbers of offspring expected if females in the population mate indiscriminately among the males available to them. The data are consistent with the hypothesis that kangaroo rats discriminate kin by familiarity developed via association early in life, rather than by using spatial cues or self-referential phenotype matching. Our approach should be widely applicable as a means of assessing the degree to which kin discrimination exists (in contexts like nepotism as well as inbreeding avoidance) and in inferring what cues animals use to assess categories of relationship.
Keywords: dipodomys, dispersal, inbreeding avoidance, kangaroo rat, kin discrimination, relatedness
Received 21 February 2011; revision received 9 May 2011; accepted 13 May 2011
Introduction
The ability to discriminate kin from non-kin has potential consequences for both direct fitness, where inbreeding depression can be avoided, and indirect fitness, where individuals’ behaviours can increase the survival or reproduction of nearby kin. Much laboratory and experimental work has investigated kin discrimination by rodents and other mammals (e.g. Mateo 2003; Holmes & Mateo 2007). Observational inferences from field studies are less common for this purpose, though they have been used in studies of nepotistic behaviour (Sherman 1981; Maher 2009; Viblanc et al. 2010) and parent-offspring recognition (Beecher 1982; Medvin
Correspondence: Peter M. Waser, Fax: 765 494 8129; E-mail: waserpm@purdue.edu
et al. 1993). While many aspects of kin discrimination (e.g. the nature of learning that is involved) require experimental analysis, observational data can be used to infer the extent to which different categories of kin are discriminated from one another, as well as the sources of information which animals might use to discriminate.
Patterns of mating, recruitment, survivorship and dispersal dictate whether opportunities for interaction among particular types of kin are common or rare (e.g. Sherman 1981). We seldom ask whether interactions among particular classes of relative occur more often than expected given the number of opportunities dictated by spacing and demography. Yet the expected frequency of opportunities for interaction among individuals sharing a particular kin relationship determines the opportunity for selection to influence those
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

interactions, either positive or negative, and the comparison of expected with observed frequencies tells us whether discrimination is occurring. Here, we describe an approach that combines genetic parentage analysis with field censuses of individually marked adults, with the potential to elucidate the extent of kin discrimination.
Where animals treat different kin categories differently, the patterns of discrimination may also be informative. Three widely acknowledged possible categories of kin discrimination have been coined ‘spatial distribution’, ‘familiarity’ and ‘phenotype matching’ (Holmes & Sherman 1983; cf. Waldman 1987; Hepper 1991; Sherman et al. 1997; Tang-Martinez 2001; Widdig 2007). We use these terms to indicate three general sources of information about relatedness that animals might exploit. Spatial distribution could be a reliable indication of relatedness where kin live close to one another, or close to their birthplace, in adulthood. Familiarity developed via spatial association early in life might usefully predict relatedness if young animals reliably live with kin for long enough to learn scents or other cues specific to them, whether or not those cues are produced by a shared genotype. Phenotype matching, particularly ‘self-referential’ phenotype matching (Hauber & Sherman 2000) would be a viable indicator of kinship wherever some aspect of an individual’s own phenotype (e.g. MHC, MUP, song type) statistically resembles that of its relatives.
In this paper, we ask whether data collected from a field study of banner-tailed kangaroo rats, Dipodomys spectabilis, support the idea that these animals discriminate among categories of kin, and if so, whether they use one or more of the above-mentioned types of cue. We focus on kin discrimination associated with inbreeding avoidance, because known parents of genotyped D. spectabilis offspring are marginally less related than expected by chance (Waser & DeWoody 2006). Moreover, DNA extracted from a small sample of copulatory plugs suggests that precopulatory kin discrimination occurs. Nearby males known to be first-degree relatives or half-siblings of the female from which a copulatory plug was collected are underrepresented among male genotypes identified in DNA from the plug, and males known not to be her close relatives are overrepresented (McCreight et al. 2011).
The natural history of D. spectabilis makes it relatively straightforward to investigate potential cues that males and females might use to assess kinship and avoid inbreeding. Each adult kangaroo rat, male or female, lives individually in a large mound, on which it is dependent for safety from predators, storage of large seed caches and thermoregulation (Vorhies & Taylor 1922). During the winter breeding season, females mate with males living in nearby mounds, producing 1–3 lit-
ters of 1–3 young. There is no obvious long-term association between a female and any single male; a female’s young may be fathered by different males in different years, in different litters within a year or even within litters (Winters & Waser 2003). Males can mate with more than one female, so that both maternal and paternal half-siblings are common in the population. The young are raised solely by their mothers and associate only with their mother and littermates until they are weaned. Therefore, young kangaroo rats have the opportunity to become familiar with their mothers, but not with their fathers. Similarly, young animals associate with their littermate full siblings and maternal half-siblings, but not with their paternal half-siblings, with their siblings from different years or with more distant relatives.
Young kangaroo rats of both sexes are quite philopatric. Especially in years of high-population density, they continue to live in their mother’s mound for many months, often dispersing to adjacent mounds or not at all (Jones 1984; Waser et al. 2005). Often, therefore, mounds near their birthplaces (or near those they occupy as adults) will be inhabited by relatives, so that spatial distribution might reasonably predict kin relationship.
With regard to the possibility that phenotypic cues might reflect genetic similarity, we have little information. Adult D. spectabilis produce individually-distinctive acoustic signatures by foot-drumming, but mothers and young have dissimilar signatures and signatures are labile, apparently changing through time so as to maximize their distinctiveness from neighbours (Randall 1995). Banner-tailed and other species of kangaroo rats discriminate familiar from unfamiliar individuals based on odour cues (including scent gland secretions) but whether these abilities would allow discrimination among relationship categories is unknown (Murdock & Randall 2001). MHC-based haplotype variation exists, but the MHC is not yet adequately characterized to assess its role in ‘labelling’ kin (Busch et al. 2008).
Any mechanism of kin discrimination will produce errors (Beecher 1982; Holmes & Sherman 1983), and the natural history of D. spectabilis predicts different patterns of errors for different mechanisms. For example, suppose mating females use ‘spatial distribution’ to discriminate against probable close relatives. If they avoid males living nearby, then both related and unrelated males living in nearby mounds should be underrepresented as fathers of their offspring. If they avoid males living near their birthplace, that pattern too should be evident among both related and unrelated males: As a result, unrelated males living near a female’s natal mound should be underrepresented as fathers of her offspring.
Similarly, the hypothesis that kangaroo rats use familiarity to discriminate and avoid mating with relatives
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
KIN DISCRIMINATION INFERRED FROM PEDIGREES 555

556 P. M. WASER ET AL.
would predict a dearth of offspring from pairs that shared a natal nest, in particular full siblings, mothers and sons, and maternal half-siblings born in the same year. If the ‘familiarity’ hypothesis were true, relatives that did not share a natal mound would have no means of recognizing each other, so that father–daughter offspring, those from paternal half-siblings, and those from maternal siblings born in different years would occur as often as expected by chance given the frequencies of such relatives in the population. Similarly, second-degree relatives related deeper in their pedigrees (like grandparents and grandoffspring, uncles and nieces, etc.) would have no history of interaction in the natal nest, and thus would not be underrepresented as parents.
Finally, if animals use self-referential phenotype matching to avoid inbreeding, then we would predict that offspring from all categories of relationship above some threshold degree of genetic relatedness should be underrepresented in the population. For example, father–daughter and mother–son matings have equally negative consequences, and should be equally avoided. If the phenotypic attributes used in kin discrimination are imperfect predictors of relatedness, then some animals might mate with close kin ‘by mistake’; if so, the frequency of errors should depend on the degree of relatedness but be independent of the particular type of relationship. Maternal and paternal half-siblings, for example, should be avoided with equal frequency.
Many other possibilities (recognition alleles, any form of postcopulatory kin discrimination, inbreeding depression expressed in utero) predict patterns of parentage similar to that expected from phenotype matching. Offspring of first-degree relatives, whether mother and son, father and daughter, or full siblings, should be equally unlikely; offspring of second-degree relatives should be more common, but it should make no difference whether they are paternal and maternal half-siblings. Finally, if self-referential phenotype matching occurs but is based on labels derived from the mother (or father), one would expect avoidance only of maternal (or paternal) siblings (Waldman 1987), but siblings born in the same or different years should be equally unlikely to produce offspring.
Here, we compare patterns of parentage observed in the field with those expected from a population of adults mating without regard to presumed familiarity, spatial relationships or phenotypic similarity. Our first step is to ask whether offspring produced by unrelated individuals are more common than expected given the distribution of such individuals in the population. If so, we can conclude that kin discrimination in some form exists, and ask which cue(s) are most likely in use.
Materials and methods
We used a theodolite to map D. spectabilis mounds on our ‘Rucker’ study site in SE Arizona, USA (31° 37’ N, 109° 15’ W), with a precision of ±2 m. We censused kangaroo rats annually (and usually more often) between 1990 and 2007; their dependence on mounds allowed us to capture essentially 100% of the adult population each year (Skvarla et al. 2004). We gave each individual an eartag in exchange for a small pinna biopsy that we used as a source of DNA. During this period, we typed 1618 juveniles with a suite of nine microsatellite markers. Using program CERVUS, we found mothers at 95% confidence for 1017 of these juveniles, fathers for 977, and both parents for 830. Census, genotyping, and parentage analysis techniques are described in detail elsewhere (Winters & Waser 2003; Waser & DeWoody 2006; Waser & Hadfield 2011).
We determined each adult’s ‘residence’ based on trapping records, using criteria developed by Jones (1984). Most adults resided in the same mound throughout their lives (up to 6 years). We defined a juvenile’s natal residence as the residence of its mother (or, if the mother disappeared before we first captured her offspring, as the mother’s last known residence; Waser & DeWoody 2006).
To determine how often mothers produced offspring with closely related fathers, we searched for first-degree (full sibling, father–daughter and mother–son) and second-degree relationships (paternal or maternal half-siblings) among the parents of the 830 offspring mentioned above. Where mother and father were siblings, we determined whether they were born during the same or different years. We distinguished full from half siblings where we knew all four of the parents’ parents. Where our pedigrees were complete enough, we also searched for offspring from matings between females and their cousins, uncles, nephews, grandfathers or grandsons. Finally, where we knew all four of the parents’ parents, we asked how often the parents were ‘unrelated’, in the sense that they shared neither mothers nor fathers (and were neither mother ⁄ son nor father ⁄ daughter pairs). Some ‘unrelated’ parents were related deeper in their pedigrees, but only a few were related as closely as second-degree kin. ‘Unrelated’ can thus be viewed as meaning ‘r < 0.25’.
To determine how often females produced offspring with males living in locations that they might have learned to recognize and avoid, we searched for cases in which fathers lived near the mother’s birthplace or her current residence. For the same 830 offspring, we tallied the number of times that the father lived within 25 m of the mother, as well as the number of times the father lived within 25 m and was unrelated to her. We
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

KIN DISCRIMINATION INFERRED FROM PEDIGREES 557
chose a threshold of 25 m because females can be reasonably assumed to range on this scale (in this study, 88% of female captures were within 25 m of their residence; elsewhere, the radius of home ranges measured by radiotracking has been reported as 30 m, Schroder 1979). Moreover, this was approximately the distance between a female and her nearest male neighbour; on average 1 male (range 0–5) lived within 25 m of the females censused in this study.
Finally, for the 336 cases in which we could determine the mother’s birthplace, we counted how often the father lived within 25 m of her natal mound, as well as how often he lived within 25 m and was unrelated to her.
To determine the number of offspring that were expected by chance given the observed location of males, we performed a randomization test. The test is similar to that used previously to investigate female preferences with regard to relatedness (Waser & DeWoody 2006). In that study, we found that a male’s probability of siring an offspring declines in an approximately negative exponential fashion with his distance from the mother (see also Waser & Hadfield 2011). We therefore simulated females whose probabilities of mating were exponentially weighted by distance. For each offspring with known parents, our simulated female lived in the mother’s residence but chose randomly among the males available to her (based on the known locations of each adult male’s residence during the relevant breeding season). The program then moved to the next offspring, again substituting an imaginary female oblivious to relatedness for its mother and choosing her mate randomly from the specific males that would have been available to her. For each of the 830 offspring, we tallied whether the ‘chosen’ male was a father, son, full sibling,..., nonrelative and also whether it lived within 25 m of the female or her birthplace. We repeated this analysis 1000 times.
Results
During the 1000 simulation replicates, an average of 90 of the males selected by randomly choosing females were ‘unrelated’. In reality, 103 females produced offspring fathered by males that shared neither parent with them. In the simulation, females chose unrelated
Fig. 1 Observed and expected numbers of times that mothers of known-parentage offspring (n = 830) (a) mated with ‘unrelated’ males, meaning those that shared neither mothers nor fathers with the mother; (b) mated with sons and (c) mated with fathers. Arrows indicate ‘Observed’ values. The histograms of ‘Expected’ values are based on 1000 replicates of the randomization test, and take into account the observed spatial distribution of males of known relationship to the females.
 200 (a)
  150
100
50
0
60 70 80 90 100 110 120
         200
150
100
50
(b)
Matings between nonrelatives
     0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
      200 (c)
150
100
50
Mother-son matings
     0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Father-daughter matings
       Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

558 P. M. WASER ET AL.
males ‡103 times in only 27 ⁄ 1000 replicates, indicating a probability <0.03 that such a strong a preference for nonrelatives would occur by chance (Fig. 1a).
Inbreeding did, however, occur in our sample of 830 offspring. 11 juveniles were apparently the result of mother–son matings. However, because sons not infrequently settle as adults near their mothers, simulated females choosing indiscriminately would have produced offspring by mating with their sons a mean of 41 times (range 22–60, P < 0.001, Fig. 1b). Father–daughter matings produced 14 offspring, but adult daughters normally live farther from their fathers than mothers from their adult sons. A simulated daughter choosing indiscriminately would have mated with her father 17 times, so the observed number of offspring resulting from father–daughter matings was no lower than expected by chance (range 4–30, P = 0.23, Fig. 1c).
Matings between full siblings born in the same year also occurred significantly less often than expected by chance. We detected no offspring of full siblings born in different years, but few such pairs existed so that
Table 1 Observed and expected frequencies of offspring with parents of known relationship categories
such matings were unlikely to occur by chance (Table 1).
Maternal half-siblings born in the same year were significantly less likely to produce offspring than expected by chance, but we could detect no significant avoidance of mating by maternal half-siblings born in different years. In contrast, paternal half-siblings produced offspring at the frequencies expected by chance, whether born in the same year or not (Table 1).
The number of offspring produced by females with known but more complicated second-order relatives (including grandfather, grandson, and various combinations of uncle, nephew and cousin) was low but not significantly different from chance (Table 1).
Males living <25 m from a female’s residence were significantly underrepresented as fathers after accounting for the overall negative exponential effect of a male’s distance from the female on his probability of paternity. However, avoidance was apparently due to the fact that nearby males commonly include the female’s sons and maternal siblings. Females produced offspring with unrelated males that lived <25 m away at rates expected by chance.
Females produced offspring with males living <25 m from their birthplaces less often than expected by chance. Again, however, this effect vanished if the analysis was confined to unrelated males (Table 2).
Discussion
Four lines of evidence clearly support the hypothesis that kangaroo rats use familiarity developed via
Table 2 Observed and expected frequencies of offspring fathered by males with a known spatial relationship to the mother’s current residence or the mound where she was born
 Number of offspring
Observed
‘Unrelated’
Son 11 41 Father 14 17
 Father’s relationship to mother
Expected p
  Full sibling (born different year)
Full sibling (born same year) Maternal half-sibling (born
different years)
Maternal half-sibling (born
same year)
Paternal half-sibling (born
different years)
Paternal half-sibling (born
same year)
Grandfather, grandson, uncle,
nephew, cousin, etc.
0 1
2 6 2 4
6 17
5 7 18 18 7 6
Spatial location relative to mother
Male living £25 m from mother
Male unrelated and living £25 m from mother
Male living £25 m from mother’s natal mound
Male unrelated and living £25 m from mother’s natal mound
Number of offspring Observed Expected P
172 197 0.002** 31 32 0.42
28 47 <0.001***
4 5 0.44
103 90
0.03* <0.001***
0.23 0.41
0.02* 0.22
<0.001*** 0.29
0.56 0.62
     ‘Expected’ values are means from 1000 replicates of the randomization test, which tallied the number of times 830 known-parentage juveniles would have been fathered by males of different relationship categories by mothers in the same locations that ‘chose’ males without regard to relationship. ‘Unrelated’ refers to cases in which the mother shared neither parent with the father (but the pair may have been related deeper in their pedigrees). ‘Grandfather, grandson...’ refers to cases in which the parents were known to be related only deeper in their pedigrees, but often by multiple paths, so that r summed across known relationships equalled or exceeded 0.25.
We simulated the ‘null’ hypothesis that a female’s probability of mating declined as a negative exponential function of the male’s distance from her current residence, but was independent of his relationship to her. Expected values are from 1000 replicates of the randomization test.
 Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

association during the first few months of life as an indicator of relatedness: (1) mother–son offspring are underrepresented while father–daughter offspring are not; (2) maternal, but not paternal half-siblings produce offspring less often than expected by chance; (3) second-degree relatives related by paths deep in their pedigrees produce offspring as often as expected by chance and (4) there is a deficit of offspring from maternal siblings born in the same year, but not from those born in different years. We detected no sign of avoidance among categories of relative that did not share a natal den. Familiarity gained through association during some sensitive period is used as a proxy for relatedness in nearly every mammal for which the possibility has been investigated, including all 31 rodent species reviewed by Mateo (2003) and most primates including Homo sapiens (the Westermarck effect in human inbreeding avoidance; Schneider & Hendrix 2000; Widdig 2007).
Under-representation of offspring from familiar firstand second-degree relatives, but not from unfamiliar ones, provides prima facie evidence that the observed effects are the result of precopulatory mate choice, and not the result of either postcopulatory mate choice or early inbreeding depression. However, we cannot be sure whether the deficit of offspring from kin that share a natal den reflects mate choice by females, males, or both. Given the apparent absence of male parental investment in this species, we imagine mate choice to be a female prerogative, but demonstrating this would require an experimental approach.
Some matings did occur among mothers and sons, and among full or maternal half siblings born in the same year. Parentage is not determined with complete certainty, but more interesting explanations are also possible. First, females can raise more than one litter during a breeding season, and while members of the first litter often remain in the natal den while their mother raises the second, they sometimes disperse. Therefore, not all siblings born in the same year are familiar with each other. Second, recognition templates might deteriorate through time, as recently demonstrated in ground squirrels Urocitellus beldingi (Mateo 2010). Third, such matings might occur during years when females have few unrelated male neighbours, so that inbred matings are better than none. Finally, inbred matings might result if males are relatively unselective and mate competition sometimes prevents females from exercising choice. We do not have the data to discriminate among these possibilities, but the first and last seem likely to us. Among same-aged maternal siblings that produced offspring, we trapped eight pairs early enough in life to assess whether they were littermates; in five cases their juvenile weights differed by >30 g,
enough to convince us that they were not. In 8 of the 11 cases of mother–son mating, the son was the mother’s nearest male neighbour; Randall (1991) has shown that such males have a clear advantage over more distant males in male–male competition.
We found no evidence that D. spectabilis females avoid males that live in familiar spatial locations. Males living either near a female’s current mound or near her birthplace are avoided, but when the analysis is restricted to unrelated males, the evidence of avoidance vanishes. Although spatial location has often been suggested as a possible indicator of relatedness in philopatric species, we are aware of no previous studies investigating this possibility except as a means for mother-offspring discrimination (Holmes & Sherman 1983; Mateo 2003).
The failure of D. spectabilis to use spatial location to avoid inbreeding is puzzling. Dispersal rates and distances are low enough that many firstand seconddegree male relatives remain near a female or her birthplace, as indicated by the expected frequencies in Table 2. A ‘rule of thumb’ predisposing females to avoid males living within 25 m would have prevented most (10 ⁄ 14) of the observed father–daughter matings and many (8 ⁄ 23) of those between maternal half-siblings. Avoiding males living within 25 m of her birthplace would have been somewhat less effective, eliminating 2 ⁄ 14 observed father–daughter matings and 7 ⁄ 23 matings between paternal half-siblings. Perhaps, even in a species as philopatric as D. spectabilis, Type 2 errors (avoiding nearby males that are in fact unrelated) are costly enough to prevent the spread of spatially based kin discrimination.
We also found no evidence that D. spectabilis use similarity to their own phenotype as an indicator of relatedness. The fact that father–daughter matings occur at the rate expected by chance provides strong evidence against self-referential phenotype matching in this species; such matings should have just as negative an effect on parental fitness as mother–son matings. Similarly, paternal and maternal half-sibling matings produce equally inbred offspring, yet only maternal half-sibling parents are underrepresented. Avoiding mates that present olfactory (or other) cues acquired specifically from the mother could also produce these patterns, but there is no evidence that full siblings or maternal half-siblings born in different years avoid mating with each other.
Males and females have extremely similar dispersal tendencies in this species, but the fact that dispersal begins from the mother’s den, not the father’s, produces an asymmetry in the risk of mating with sons vs. fathers. Nearby fathers are less common than nearby sons (‘expected’ column, Table 1). Nevertheless, the frequency of nearby fathers seems high enough that
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
KIN DISCRIMINATION INFERRED FROM PEDIGREES 559

560 P. M. WASER ET AL.
selection on females should favour some means of avoiding them. It has been suggested that self-referential phenotype matching should occur in species with multiple maternity or paternity, as well as in relatively social species where individuals commonly have opportunities to interact with unfamiliar kin (Sherman 1981; Schwagmeyer 1988; Mateo 2010). In sciurids, the extent of self-referential kin discrimination appears to differ even between congeners, suggesting that the cues used for kin discrimination are quite labile evolutionarily (Mateo 2003). Why self-referential mechanisms of kin discrimination are apparently absent in D. spectabilis remains an open question.
Beyond the implications of this study for kangaroo rats, we believe that the methodology we have used should be widely applicable in contemporary field studies where the investigator has both spatial and genetic data for successive cohorts of animals (cf. Costello et al. 2008). Because inbreeding (at least among firstand second-degree relatives) often has strong negative fitness consequences (Keller & Waller 2002), it seems likely that where cues for discriminating close kin are utilized, they will influence mating patterns; in other words, the ‘action’ component of kin discrimination will generally be observed (Sherman et al. 1997).
The process of estimating the expected frequency of opportunities for interaction among particular categories of kin has utility well beyond our current application. We note the clarity with which avoidance of particular categories of kin emerges in this analysis, compared to the weak evidence for avoidance shown in our earlier analysis of parental coefficients of relatedness (Waser & DeWoody 2006). In the former analysis, we found the mean r among parents was 0.04, while that expected from random mating was 0.06 (P = 0.06). In retrospect, two problems weakened the earlier analysis. First, we combined matings between categories of relative that had the means to detect their relationship with those that did not. Second, we diluted the relatively rare cases in which mates were close relatives (and thus had reason to avoid each other) by lumping them with the much more common cases of mating among distant relatives (for which there was no expectation of avoidance).
We believe that similar issues arise in many other analyses of kin-related behaviour. For example Lukas et al. (2005) showed that mean relatedness of males within chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) groups was surprisingly low – a result that appeared to raise questions about the role of kinship in the evolution of male social cooperation. As Lukas et al. pointed out, this result reflected the presence of multiple patrilines, not immediately related to each other, in the group. But low average relatedness may not tell the whole story (Brad-
ley et al. 2007). We suspect that understanding how often particular categories of close male kin co-occur in chimpanzee groups would be more informative than knowing the average relatedness among all males in the group. In summary, the approach we develop in this paper should have general utility both in understanding the opportunity for selection to favour (or disfavour) interactions among particular types of kin, and in detecting the presence of such interactions.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially supported by the NSF (DEB 0816925). We thank Nicolas Perrin, Nelly Me ́nard and Eric Petit for organizing the conference that led to this analysis, Andrew DeWoody and numerous members of his laboratory for microsatellite development and genotyping, and Paul Sherman, Warren Holmes and two anonymous reviewers for comments on early versions of the manuscript.
References
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
