         ORIGINAL ARTICLE
DIFFERENTIAL SELECTION BETWEEN THE SEXES AND SELECTION FOR SEX
Denis Roze1,2,3 and Sarah P. Otto4
1CNRS, UMR 7144, Adaptation et Diversite ́ en Milieu Marin, 29682 Roscoff, France 2UPMC Universite ́ Paris VI, 29682 Roscoff, France
3E-mail: roze@sb-roscoff.fr
4Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada
Received May 31, 2011
Accepted August 28, 2011
Data Archived: Dryad: doi:10.5061/dryad.1m104
Anisogamy is known to generate an important cost for sexual reproduction (the famous “twofold cost of sex”). However, male– female differences may have other consequences on the evolution of sex, due to the fact that selective pressures may differ among the sexes. On the one hand, intralocus sexual conflict should favor asexual females, which can fix female-beneficial, male-detrimental alleles. On the other hand, it has been suggested repeatedly that sexual selection among males may help to purge the mutation load, providing an advantage to sexual females. However, no analytical model has computed the strength of selection acting on a modifier gene affecting the frequency of sexual reproduction when selection differs between the sexes. In this article, we analyze a two-locus model using two approaches: a quasi-linkage-equilibrium (QLE) analysis and a local stability analysis, whose predictions are verified using a multilocus simulation. We find that costly sex can be maintained when selection is stronger in males than in females, but acts in the same direction in both. Complete asexuality, however, evolves under any other form of selection. Finally, we discuss how experimental measurements of fitness variances and covariances between sexes could be used to determine the overall direction and strength on selection for sex arising from differences in selection between males and females.
K E Y W O R D S : Evolution of sex, modifier model, multilocus model, sexual selection, sexually antagonistic selection.
The last few decades have seen considerable advances in our understanding of the mechanisms that may generate an evolutionary advantage to sexual reproduction. In particular, several plausible scenarios have been described under which sex gains an indirect advantage (see Otto 2009 for a review): directional selection in finite populations, involving either the spread of advantageous alleles, the elimination of deleterious alleles, or both (e.g., Fisher 1930; Muller 1932; Otto and Barton 2001; Iles et al. 2003; Barton and Otto 2005; Keightley and Otto 2006; Roze and Barton 2006; Hartfield et al. 2010), fluctuating epistasis, generated, for example, by host–parasite coevolution (Hamilton 1980; Peters and Lively 1999; Gandon and Otto 2007; Salathe ́ et al.
2009), or spatially varying selection, which may under some circumstances favor sex and recombination (Bell 1982; Lenormand and Otto 2000; Agrawal 2009; Becks and Agrawal 2010). Conversely, sex may be disadvantageous due to different factors: direct costs, such as the cost of males (Maynard Smith 1971) or time and energy required to find a mate, and indirect costs stemming from the breaking apart of genotypes that have been favored by selection: in particular, dominance and epistatic interactions often disfavor sex when mating is random (Barton 1995; Otto 2003; Roze and Michod 2010). A few studies compared the effects of several of these forces acting together: for example, Otto and Barton (2001) and Keightley and Otto (2006) showed that for many
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2011.01459.x
 ⃝C 2011 The Author(s). Evolution ⃝C 2011 The Society for the Study of Evolution. 5 5 8 Evolution 66-2: 558–574

         combinations of parameters, epistasis has little effect on selection for sex generated by finite population size. Furthermore, Keightley and Otto (2006) showed that an allele coding for a low rate of sex may be favored in a fully asexual population even when sex has a strong direct cost. Nevertheless, more theoretical work is needed to explore how the different forces affecting selection for sex scale with the parameters (population size, mutation rates, selection coefficients, etc.) and how high rates of sex may evolve despite strong direct costs.
The idea that sexual selection may partly offset the cost of sex has been proposed by several authors, first using verbal arguments (Trivers 1976; Kodric-Brown and Brown 1987) and later analytical or simulation models (Manning 1984; Agrawal 2001; Siller 2001; Hadany and Beker 2007). Indeed, many mutations that are detrimental for females may also reduce the mating success of males, in which case sexual selection among males helps to reduce the mutation load (Whitlock 2000; Whitlock and Agrawal 2009). Under this scenario, sexual females gain an advantage over asexual females by transmitting better purged genomes to their offspring. Agrawal (2001) and Siller (2001) derived expressions for the equilibrium mean fitness of fully asexual and fully sexual females, under recurrent deleterious mutations occurring over a whole genome, and assuming that selection against mutations is stronger in males. They both showed that the fitness of sexual females may be more than twice higher than the fitness of asexuals if the mutation rate U is sufficiently high and sexual selection sufficiently strong (e.g., Fig. 2 in Agrawal [2001] shows that the fitness of sexuals is about twice the fitness of asexuals when U = 1 and selection in males is twice as strong as females).
These mutation load arguments cannot, however, be used to predict the outcome of competition between genotypes coding for different rates of sex: indeed, facultatively sexual females can also benefit to some extent from the stronger purge occurring in males. Hadany and Beker (2007) used deterministic simulations to model competition between obligate and partial sexuals. They found that for high mutation rates and strong sexual selection, obligate sex may be favored against rare sex (with a twofold cost of sex); however, they did not explore what the evolutionarily stable (ES) rate of sex would be for the different parameter values.
In this article, we use a two-locus model to obtain expressions for the strength of selection acting on a modifier locus that affects the rate of sex due to differential selection between males and females at a second, linked locus. The selection model is general and can be used to consider either deleterious or beneficial mutations with different effects in the sexes, selection in one sex only, or sexually antagonistic selection (one allele being favored in males, and the other in females). This last case is of particular importance, as it has been suggested that sexually antagonistic selection may be an important source of fitness variance within populations (e.g., Rice 1992; Chippindale et al. 2001;
Rice and Chippindale 2001; Pischedda and Chippindale 2006; Prasad et al. 2007), which should provide an advantage to asexual females. We find that differential selection between the sexes can generate a selective force favoring sex (of order s2, where s measures the strength of selection) that is stronger in magnitude than that found in similar models with equivalent selection in males and females (that are typically of order s3 or s4). This advantage only arises when the strength but not the direction of selection differs between the sexes. Using multilocus simulations, we show that extrapolations from our two-locus model often give correct predictions for the ES rate of sex when mutations occur at many loci. Our results show that differential selection between the sexes is an important component of selection for sex, but it seems unlikely to maintain obligate sex when the cost of sex is high. Finally, we discuss possible experimental estimations of the strength of selection for sex arising from sex differences in selection.
Two-Locus Model
The analytical model considers two loci: one sex-modifier locus and one selected locus, in an infinite population. Individuals are diploid; females may reproduce either sexually or asexually, whereas males only reproduce sexually. Anisogamy is known to generate a cost for sexual reproduction (Maynard Smith 1971); this cost is twofold when sexual females invest half of their resources into the production of males, if these males do not provide any resources to the next generation (“twofold cost of sex”, or “cost of males”). This cost vanishes, however, when males and females provide equal amounts of resources to the offspring. To study the effect of this cost of sex, we introduce a parameter c that modulates paternal contribution to the egg in terms of resources. More precisely, the model assumes that a fertilized egg must contain a quantity x of resources, and that the male gamete contributes a proportion π = 1 − c/2 to this quantity; c = 1 thus corresponds to isogamy (no cost of sex), and c = 2 to extreme anisogamy, where the male gamete does not bring any resource (twofold cost). Female k invests a proportion σk of her resources available for reproduction into the production of ovules (produced by meiosis), and a proportion 1 − σk into the production of asexual eggs (produced by mitosis). Assuming that asexual eggs must contain the same quantity x of resources as fertilized eggs, the female produces (K/x)(1 − σk) asexual eggs, where K is the total amount of resources available for reproduction, and [K/(x(1 − π))]σk = (K/x)(2/c)σk ovules. Asexual eggs generate new female individuals, whereas sexual eggs generate males and females in equal proportions. Accordingly, the numbers of asexually produced females, sexually produced females and males generated by female k are proportional to 1 − σk , σk /c and σk /c, respectively. An important assumption of the model is that the sex ratio among
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 559

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
sexually produced offspring does not evolve. Under the above assumption of a 50:50 investment in sons and daughters among sexual eggs, the primary sex ratio of females:males accounting for the proportion of individuals that we expect to engage in sexual reproduction becomes (1 − σ + σ/c)σ/(σ/c) (assuming all females have the same investment into sex σk = σ), which is female biased whenever there is some asexual reproduction and c > 1. Hence, we would expect sexually produced offspring to evolve to a male-biased sex ratio (we thank Steve Proulx for pointing this out). Although the question of the joint evolution of the sex ratio and the investment into sex is interesting, we leave it for future studies.
The level of sex is modulated by a modifier with two alleles, m and M, where females of genotype mm, Mm, and MM engage in sex at frequency σ, σ + hMδσ and σ + δσ, respectively (δσ thus denotes the effect of the M allele on the rate of sex, and hM measures the dominance of M over m). Two alleles a and A also segregate at the selected locus, and we will write the relative fitness of aa, Aa, and AA females as 1, 1 + h♀s♀, and 1 + s♀, and the relative fitness of aa, Aa, and AA males as 1, 1 + h♂s♂, and 1 + s ♂ (s ♀ and s ♂ can be negative). “Fitness” stands for the reproductive output of an individual: female fitness may be seen as the total amount of resources available for reproduction (K above); selection may act either on survival (K = 0 if the female dies) or on fertility. The fitness of a male measures its overall success at fertilizing ovules, which may in turn depend on its relative survival, relative fertility (i.e., total number of gametes produced, in which case we assume random fusion between male and female gametes), or mating success (in which case we assume polygyny). Finally, r denotes the recombination rate between the two loci.
The dynamics of the system can be studied from the recursions for the 10 diploid genotype frequencies (nine independent variables) in females and in males (which gives 18 equations); these recursions are given in Appendix A. In the following, we explore this system using two methods: a quasi-linkage-equilibrium (QLE) analysis that assumes sufficiently large rates of sex and recombination so that linkage disequilibria and other genetic associations equilibrate fast relative to changes in allele frequencies, and a local stability analysis, giving the conditions under which allele M increases in frequency when rare.
Quasi-Linkage Equilibrium
DEFINITIONS
The first step of the QLE analysis is to derive recursions for allele frequencies and genetic associations in males and females (Barton and Turelli 1991; Kirkpatrick et al. 2002); for this, we now define a number of new variables. Define Xl(k1) and Xl(k2) as indicator
variables that equal 1 if individual k carries an uppercase allele at locus l on its first and second haplotype, respectively. The average frequencies of allele M in females and males are given by
560 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012
􏰠X+X􏰡 􏰠X+X􏰡 M(k1) M(k2) , pM♂ = E♂ M(k1) M(k2) ,
22
(1)
where E♀ and E♂ stand for the averages over all females and over
all males. The average frequencies of A in females and males ( pA♀
and pA♂) are given by similar expressions. Genetic associations as
defined along the lines of Kirkpatrick et al. (2002): D♀ denotes U,V
the association between genes in sets U and V present in the first and second haplotypes of a female, respectively, and is defined as
pM♀ = E♀
  with
♀ 􏰢􏰚 ζU(k1) =
♀􏰛 ♀ 􏰢􏰚 Xl(k1) − pl , ζV(k2) =
♀􏰛
Xl(k2) − pl . (3)
D ̃♀U,V =
D♂ +D♂
U,V V,U . (4)
D♀ =E♀􏰜ζ♀ ζ♀ 􏰝, (2) U,V U(k 1) V(k 2)
l∈V
U,V ♀
being among all males and the “reference values” (the pl ’s in
the equation above) being replaced by average allele frequencies
among males. In the context of the present model, sets U and
V may be the empty set ∅, M, A, or MA. For example, D♀ MA,∅
represents the linkage disequilibrium between alleles at loci M and A on the first haplotype of females. Finally, we define D ̃ ♀U,V a n d D ̃ ♂U , V a s
l∈U
Associations in males D♂ are defined similarly, the average
D♀ +D♀ U,V V,U,
In particular, D ̃ ♀MA,∅ (which we will simply denote as D ̃ ♀MA ) is the average linkage disequilibrium between alleles at loci M and A on the same chromosome in females.
To derive recursions, it is useful to write the fitness of female k (denoted Wk♀), relative to the average fitness of females (denoted W♀) as
Wk♀ ♀􏰚♀ ♀􏰛♀􏰚♀♀ ♀􏰛 W ♀ = 1 + aA ζA(k1) + ζA(k2) + aA,A ζA(k1)ζA(k2) − DA,A ,
D ̃♂U,V = 22
   (5) where a♀ and a♀ represent the effect of direct selection and
A A,A
dominance at locus A (Kirkpatrick et al. 2002) and are approxi-
mately equal to
a♀ ≈ s♀􏰜h♀ + (1 − 2h♀)p♀􏰝, a♀
≈ s♀(1 − 2h♀) (6) when s♀ is small. Selection on males can be represented using
A AA,A
similar coefficients a♂ and a♂ . Finally, the investment into A A,A
sexual reproduction of female k (σk) can also be written in terms
 
         of ζ variables
σ =σ+dσ 􏰚ζ♀ +ζ♀ 􏰛+dσ 􏰚ζ♀ ζ♀ −D♀ 􏰛
multiplied by the frequency of M in the parental female. The secondtermisthegeneticcontributionofmalestofemalesofthenext generation (which depends on the number of sexually produced females), multiplied by the frequency of M in the male gamete pool. Equation (9) can be alternatively written as
􏰓pM♀
􏰧􏰘􏰘􏰙􏰙♀􏰨􏰧♀􏰨􏰩􏰧♂􏰨􏰪
E1−σ1−1Wkζ♀+1EσWk EWkζ♂+∇ ♀ k 2c W♀M(k) 2c♀kW♀ ♂W♂M(k) M
= 􏰧􏰘 􏰘 1􏰙􏰙W♀􏰨 , E♀ 1−σk 1− k
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
 k
with
M M(k1) M(k2) M,M M(k1) M(k2) M,M (7)
σ=σ+δσ􏰜2hMp♀+(1−2hM)􏰚p♀2+D♀ 􏰛􏰝, M MM,M
􏰜􏰚♀􏰛 ♀􏰝 dσM=δσhM1−p +(1−hM)p ,
 MM dσM,M =δσ(1−2hM).
      (8)
These definitions can be used to compute recursions for allele frequencies and genetic associations, as shown in the next section. As we will see, dσM,M does not appear in the results (due to the fact that the model assumes random union of gametes); furthermore, the term in square brackets in the expression for σ above will generate terms of order δσ2, which will be neglected in the QLE model. Therefore, the modifier effect is, to leading order, described by σ ≈ σ and by dσM.
In the following, we consider the case of a weak modifier (δσ small) and calculate all terms to the leading order in δσ. We derive an expression for the change in allele frequency at the modifier locus, as a function of different types of genetic associations between the two loci, in males and females. We then use the QLE approximation to express these associations in terms of allele frequencies and model parameters: if selection is sufficiently weak (s ♂ , s ♀ small) and rates of sex and recombination sufficiently high, genetic associations quickly reach small values, and then change very slowly over time (e.g., Nagylaki 1993). One can express associations at this quasi-equilibrium by writing recursions for associations, and solving these recursions at equilibrium (Barton and Turelli 1991; Kirkpatrick et al. 2002). Note that this type of approximation does not hold when the rate of sex is low.
CHANGE IN FREQUENCY OF THE MODIFIER
The change in frequency of M among females, over one generation, can be written as
􏰓pM♀
=
1 − σk 1 − c Wk
where XM(k) = (XM(k1) + XM(k2))/2 is the frequency of M in in-
dividual k. The denominator of equation (9) is proportional to the total number of females produced. The first term of the numerator is the average over all parental females of their genetic contribution to females of the next generation through asexual reproduction (1 − σk ) and through sexual reproduction (σk /2c),
c W♀ (10)
  where ∇M = pM♂ − pM♀ , and ζ♀M(k) = (ζ♀M(k1) + ζ♀M(k2))/2 (and similarly for ζ♂M(k ) ). We can then simplify this expression by replacing σk by equation (7) and assuming that the modifier has only a weak effect on the rate of sex (δσ is small). Expressing equation (10) tothefirstorderinδσ,andreplacingWk♀/W♀andWk♂/W♂ by equation (5) and the equivalent expression for males yields an expression for 􏰓pM♀ in terms of allele frequencies and genetic associations
  􏰫􏰠 􏰘 􏰙􏰡
♀11 􏰓pM= 􏰘1􏰙1−σ1−2c
1−σ 1−c
􏰜♀􏰚 ̃♀  ̃♀􏰛♀ ̃♀􏰝
   ×aA DMA+DM,A +aA,ADMA,A + σ 􏰜 a ♂ 􏰚 D ̃ ♂ + D ̃ ♂ 􏰛 + a ♂ D ̃ ♂
+ ∇ 􏰝 M
(11)
 2c A MA M,A 􏰘1􏰙􏰬
− d σ M 1 − 2 c p M♀ q M♀ ,
A,A MA,A
 where qM♀ = 1 − pM♀ is the frequency of allele m among females. The change in frequency of M in males is given by a similar
expression as equation (9),
􏰓pM♂
E σkW♀X +E σkW♀E Wk X
􏰣􏰦􏰣􏰦􏰧♂􏰨
♀ 2c k
which, to the first order in δσ and after simplification, gives
M(k)
♀ 2c k 􏰣σk ♀􏰦
♂ W♂ M(k)
−pM♂,
   =
  􏰣􏰤􏰥􏰦􏰣􏰦􏰧♂􏰨 E 1−σ+σk W♀X +E σkW♀E Wk X
E♀ cWk 1􏰜♀􏰚♀♀􏰛♀♀ 􏰝
(12)
( 1 3 )
♀
k 2c E♀
k M(k) ♀ 2c k 􏰠􏰘 􏰘 1􏰙􏰙 ♀􏰡
♂ W♂ M(k) (9)
   􏰓pM♂=2aA D ̃MA+D ̃M,A +aA,AD ̃MA,A−∇M 1􏰜♂􏰚♂ ♂􏰛♂♂􏰝
   − pM♀,
+2 aA D ̃MA +D ̃M,A +aA,A D ̃MA,A + d σ M p M♂ q M♂ .
  2σ
To compute an average change in frequency of M in the whole population, it can be shown that we must weight the frequencies in females and males by the reproductive value of each sex, defined as its relative genetic contribution to future generations
 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 561

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
(in particular, this allows us to eliminate the terms in ∇M from the average). These reproductive values θ♀ and θ♂ can be defined as the limit as t tends to infinity of the probability that a gene sampled at the present generation was in a female (or a male) t generations ago (e.g., Taylor 1990). These probabilities only depend on the proportions of sexually and asexually produced females and are given by (to leading order)
D ̃ MA , D ̃ M,A in females and males at QLE are given by D ̃ ♀M A = − d σ M 􏰚 a A♀ − a A♂ 􏰛
  θ♀= c(1−σ)+σ, θ♂= σ c(1−σ)+2σ c(1−σ)+2σ
(14)
♂
(see Supplementary File 1 for a derivation). Note that in the case of the present model, these reproductive values are equal to the proportion of females and males at birth in the population (and thus the weighted allele frequency is simply the average frequency in the whole population). However, if the sex ratio among sexually produced offspring was different from 1/2, reproductive values would still be given by equation (14), provided that the proportion of sexually versus asexually produced females (and thus the cost of sex) remains the same—note also that equations (11) and (13) are independent of the sex ratio among sexual offspring. The change in weighted frequency of M is then given by
􏰓pM =θ♀􏰓pM♀ +θ♂􏰓pM♂. (15)
At quasi-equilibrium, the difference in frequency of M between females and males (∇M) is of order δσ (when δσ = 0 both alleles are equivalent, and thus both should be at the same frequencies in males and females). Because pM♀ qM♀ and pM♂qM♂ are multiplied by δσ in equations (11) and (13), and because we express 􏰓pM to the first order in δσ only, we can thus replace these terms by pMqM. From equations (11) and (13), one then obtains
[c (1 − σ) + σ] [σ (3c − 2 + 2r ) + c (1 − 2r σ)] 2r [c (1 − σ) + 2σ]2
􏰤 ♀ ♂􏰥 (c−1)[c(1−σ)+σ] aA −aA [c(1−σ)+2σ]2
D ̃♀ M,A
σ
× [c(1−σ)+σ][σ(3c−2+2r)+c(1+2r)] pqMA,
2r [c(1−σ)+2σ]2
=−dσM 􏰚a♀−a♂􏰛(c+σ)[c(1−σ)+σ] pq
σ A A [c (1 − σ) + 2σ]2 MA, dσM 􏰚 ♀ ♂􏰛
    D ̃MA=−σ aA−aA
 × D ̃M,A = dσM
pqMA, pqMA,
 ♂
 􏰓p=−dσ c−1 pq
where all the fractions (functions of σ, c, and r) are always positive,
and where pqMA = pMqMpAqA. All these associations are propor-
tional to the difference in selection between the sexes (aA♀ − aA♂);
the case aA♀ = aA♂ involves terms of lower order and has been
previously treated (e.g., Otto 2003; Roze and Michod 2010). For
example, consider the case where allele A is advantageous in both
males and females, but more so in males (aA♂ > aA♀ > 0). Allele
A then tends to have a higher frequency in males than in females.
Because allele m invests less in sexual reproduction, it spends
more time than allele M within females, in which the frequency
of A is lower; this tends to generate positive disequilibria D ̃ ♀MA ,
D ̃♀M,A, which can be transmitted across generations due to asex-
ual reproduction. By contrast, allele M spends more time than
allele m within males, in which the frequency of A is higher (an
expression for ∇M = pM♂ − pM♀ at QLE is given by eq. B5 in
Appendix B). This tends to generate positive linkage disequilib-
rium DMA among gametes, and thus positive associations D ̃ ♀MA ,
D ̃ ♂ . Interestingly, D ̃ ♂ is negative. This comes from the fact MA M,A
that a sexually produced male carrying allele M is more likely to have inherited this allele from its father, because the frequency of M is higher in males than in females. The other chromosome is thus more likely to be inherited from the female parent, in which the frequency of A is lower on average. However, D ̃ ♂M,A remains small in absolute value relative to the other associations (because it cannot be transmitted from one generation to the next as males cannot reproduce asexually), especially, when σ is small. Consequently the sum D ̃ ♂MA + D ̃ ♂M,A is generally positive, so that allele M tends to be associated with the better allele A in both males and females. By symmetry, allele M also tends to be associated with the fitter allele in both sexes when A is deleterious and has a stronger effect on male fitness (aA♂ < aA♀ < 0), whereas M tends to be associated with the least fit allele when selection is stronger in females than in males (aA♀<aA♂<0 or aA♀>aA♂>0).
M
The first term of equation (16) represents the cost of anisogamy (or cost of males), which favors decreased investment into sex (dσM < 0) and vanishes when c = 1 (isogamy). The two other terms represent indirect selection generated by associations between alleles M and A in females (second term) and males (third term). The next subsection provides expressions for these associations at QLE.
QUASI-LINKAGE EQUILIBRIUM
Recursions for genetic associations are obtained using standard multilocus methods (e.g., Kirkpatrick et al. 2002). As an example, the derivation of the recursion for D ̃ ♀MA is shown in Appendix B. To the first order in selection coefficients, pairwise associations
Mc(1−σ)+2σ M M +θ♀􏰜a♀􏰚D ̃♀ +D ̃♀ 􏰛+a♀ D ̃♀ 􏰝
(17)
 A MA M,A A,A MA,A ♂􏰜♂􏰚 ̃♂  ̃♂􏰛 ♂ ̃♂􏰝
+θ aA DMA+DM,A +aA,ADMA,A . (16)
 562 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012

         ♀♂
The other associations that appear in equation (16) are D ̃ ♀MA,A and D ̃ ♂MA,A , measuring whether allele M tends to be associated with homozygotes at locus A ( D ̃ ♀MA,A , D ̃ ♂MA,A positive) or with heterozygotes ( D ̃ ♀MA,A , D ̃ ♂MA,A negative) in females and males. At QLE and to the first order in selection coefficients, they are given by
where scost represents the direct cost of sex (first line of eq. 16), M
sdom selection against sex generated by dominance in females M♀ diff
Finally, under sexually antagonistic selection (aA , aA of opposite signs), M tends to be associated with the male-beneficial allele (in both sexes).
(term in aA,A , discussed in the previous paragraph), and sM selection generated by the difference in selection in males and females (term in aA♂ − aA♀). From equations (16) and (17), this last term is given by
allele M increases sex (δσ > 0), D ̃ MA,A and aA,A have opposite signs. A positive value of a♀ means that female homozygotes
A,A
have a higher fitness than heterozygotes; selection thus generates
an excess of female homozygotes, and sex tends to reduce this
excess. Allele m thus tends to be associated with homozygotes
among females, and allele M with heterozygotes ( D ̃ ♀MA,A < 0).
Conversely, when heterozygotes have higher fitness (a♀ < 0), A,A
selection generates an excess of heterozygotes, and M tends to
be associated with homozygotes ( D ̃ ♀MA,A > 0). This effect is the
driving force of selection on a sex modifier due to segregation
(in the absence of differences in selection between the sexes) and
has been described previously (e.g., Otto 2003; Agrawal 2009;
Roze and Michod 2010). Note that dominance in males (a♂ ) A,A
does not generate an equivalent association, because departures
from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium generated by selection among
males do not persist over generations (males are always pro-
duced sexually). Substituting (18) into equation (16), the term
θ♀ a♀ D ̃ ♀ always selects against sex. D ̃ ♀ would also genA,A MA,A MA,A
erate associations D ̃ MA , D ̃ M,A that favor sex if the deleterious allele at locus A is partially recessive (see Otto 2003; Agrawal 2009). However, these terms are of smaller magnitude and are not included in the leading order terms of (17). Finally, note that D ̃♀MA,A is proportional to the square of the genetic variance at the selected locus, (pqA )2 , and may thus be much smaller than associations given in equation (17), which are proportional to the genetic variance (in particular when pA or qA is low).
In the following, we define the strength of selection for the modifier allele M as
􏰓p
sM≡M. (19)
pM qM
From equations (16–18), sM can be decomposed into three terms:
s = scost + sdom + sdiff, (20) MMMM
pq.(23) A A
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
 D ̃♀ MA,A
dσ A,A σ2
diff 􏰚♂ ♀􏰛􏰚 ♂ ♀􏰛 sM ≈dσM aA −aA T1aA +T2aA
× c (1 − σ) + σ pAqA 2rσ[c(1−σ)+2σ]3 (21)
T1 = σ[σ(3c−2+4r)+c(1−4rσ)],
T2 = [c(1−σ)+σ][σ(3c−2+4r)+c(1+4r)], (22)
which are both positive. When c = 1 (no cost of sex), this simplifies to
dσ 􏰚a♂−a♀􏰛􏰚a♂σ+a♀(1+4r)􏰛 sdiff≈MA AA A
M 2rσ(1+σ)2
From equation (21), we can see that increased sex is favored when
the direction of selection is the same in males and females and
=−a♀ D ̃ ♂M A , A = 0 .
M c(1+σ)θ♀pqM(pqA)2,
The association D ̃ ♀MA,A is generated by dominance at locus A in
females (a♀ ≈ s♀(1 − 2h♀)) and by the modifier effect. When A,A ♀♀
with
 (18)
 selection is stronger in males (aA >aA ≥0 or aA <aA ≤0),
whereas sex is disfavored when selection is stronger in females
(aA♀ > aA♂ ≥ 0 or aA♀ < aA♂ ≤ 0). Interestingly, selection occur-
ring only in males (aA♀ = 0) tends to favor an increased invest-
ment into sex among females; this is due to the fact that fe-
males who have sex more often tend to produce fitter sons and
therefore transmit more genes through males than females who
have sex less often. This effect should disappear as σ approaches
zero, but the QLE approximation then breaks down; however,
we will see that the stability analysis confirms that indirect se-
lection vanishes when a♀ = 0 in the case of a fully asexual A
mutant.
Under sexually antagonistic selection, equation (21) suggests
that it is also possible for increased levels of sex to evolve as long as aA♂ is sufficiently large relative to aA♀. Although this is possible transiently, we show in the next section that, at the equilibrium reached under sexually antagonistic selection, sex is always disfavored (recall that aA♀ and aA♂ depend on the frequency of allele A, according to equation (6)).
EQUILIBRIUM UNDER SEXUALLY ANTAGONISTIC SELECTION
Conditions for the maintenance of polymorphism at locus A by sexually antagonistic selection are given in Appendix C. Under weak selection, one can obtain an approximate equilibrium expression for pA as follows: to the first order in selection coefficients, the change in frequency of A in females and males is
♂♀ ♂♀
  EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 563

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
given by
where ξ is a small term. For arbitrary cost of sex c, we could
obtain a simple expression for the leading eigenvalue λ of the
Jacobian matrix (which determines whether the equilibrium under
sexually antagonistic selection is stable) only for the case of a
weak modifier (δσ small); in particular, we find that when σ and r
are not too low, differential selection between the sexes affects λ
through the term given in equation (30) (where dσM now becomes
hMδσ): therefore, the stability analysis confirms the result of the
QLE approximation when sex and recombination are not too rare,
and the modifier effect is small (the cost of sex and dominance
in females also affect λ through the same terms scost and sdom as MM
found in the QLE analysis). In the case where c = 1 + O(ξ2) (weak cost of sex), however, we obtained a simple expression for λ valid for any value of δσ:
♀ 2c(1−σ)+σ ♀
􏰓pA =2[c(1−σ)+σ]aApAqA
+ σ 􏰚a♂p q +∇ 􏰛, (24) 2[c(1−σ)+σ] A A A A
􏰓p♂=1􏰜􏰚a♀+a♂􏰛pq−∇􏰝 (25) A2AAAAA
   with ∇A = pA♂ − pA♀. Subtracting equation (24) from equation (25) gives us the change in ∇A over one generation. At equilibrium, one obtains
∇A =􏰚aA♂−aA♀􏰛
Injecting equation (26) into equations (24) and (25) gives identical
c(1−σ) pAqA. c(1−σ)+2σ
(26)
 expressions for 􏰓pA♀ and 􏰓pA♂, to leading order ♂♀
hMδσ pAqA
λ = 1− σ(σ+hMδσ)(1+σ+hMδσ)
 􏰓p♀ ≈􏰓p♂ ≈􏰓p ≈ aA σ+aA [c(1−σ)+σ] p q . (27) A A A c(1−σ)+2σ AA
􏰧􏰚 􏰛 h δσa♀a♂􏰨 × a♀ 2pAqA−2σa♀a♂+ M A A
  Finally, using a♀≈s♀􏰜h♀+(1−2h♀)p♀􏰝≈s♀􏰜h♀+(1−2h♀)p 􏰝,
A,A AA 2r − (c−1)hMδσ +o􏰚ξ2􏰛.
(32)
 AAA
M increases when rare if λ is greater than 1 (λ − 1 being a
measure of the strength of selection for allele M, e.g., Otto and
Bourguet [1999]). The term on the last line of equation (32) rep-
resents the effect of the cost of sex (favoring modifiers that reduce
sex whenever c > 1), whereas the remaining term corresponds to
indirect selection generated by the selected locus. This part may
be interpreted as follows: the first term between brackets repre-
sents selection against sex generated by dominance within females
(see discussion of eq. 18 above). The second and third terms are
generated by sexually antagonistic selection; the second term is
equivalent to equation (30) and disfavors sex (remember that the
a♂≈s♂􏰜h♂+(1−2h♂)p♂􏰝≈s♂􏰜h♂+(1−2h♂)p 􏰝 AAA
(28) (as differences between pA♀, pA♂ and pA are of order s) and solving
􏰓pA = 0 yields (besides the trivial equilibria pA = 0 and pA = 1) pA ≈− s♂h♂σ+s♀h♀[c(1−σ)+σ] . (29)
s♂(1−2h♂)σ+s♀(1−2h♀)[c(1−σ)+σ]
Plugging equations (28) and (29) into equation (21) gives (at QLE and to the leading order in δσ and selection)
sdiff ≈−2c(1+σ)dσ M
with
􏰘 􏰙2 c(1−σ)+σ
S2 p q A A
(30)
(31)
product aA♀aA♂ is negative under sexually antagonistic selection), 2
M c(1−σ)+2σ (h♀ − h♂)s♀s♂
whereas the third term (proportional to δσ ) favors the spread of any modifier (either increasing or decreasing sex). This last term increases in magnitude as the recombination rate r decreases. This third term can be understood as follows: mutations increasing sex can spread when they are tightly linked to the male-beneficial allele, whereas mutations decreasing sex spread when they are tightly linked to the female-beneficial allele. This is confirmed by considering the case of complete linkage (r = 0): when allele M is found to be associated with allele A (the Ma haplotype does not occur), one obtains that the strength of selection for allele M is given by
Equation (30) does not depend on r (although the QLE assumes that r is not too small) and is always negative when allele M increases sex, showing that polymorphism maintained by sexually antagonistic selection always disfavors sex at equilibrium.
Local Stability Analysis
INVASION OF A NEW MODIFIER WITH SEXUALLY ANTAGONISTIC SELECTION
To explore the robustness of the above results in cases where σ and r might be low, we turn to a local stability analysis. We assume again that selection is weak: s♀ and s♂ are of order ξ,
hMδσ aA♂ qA 1 + σ + hMδσ
1 + σ + hMδσ
  S = s♂(1−2h♂)σ+s♀(1−2h♀)[c(1−σ)+σ] .
 + o (ξ) (33) while when M is associated with allele a, it becomes
 −hMδσaA♂pA +o(ξ) (34) 1 + σ + hMδσ
  564 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012

         (although these equations do not explicitly depend on aA♀, one can show that aA♀ = −aA♂σ when locus A is at the polymorphic equilibrium). Therefore, a modifier haplotype associated with the male-beneficial allele spreads if it increases the frequency of sex, because the modifier then finds itself more often in males (when r is low). Conversely, a modifier associated with the femalebeneficial allele spreads if it decreases the frequency of sex, because it then finds itself less often in males (where it is selected against). However, because the probability that a mutant allele at the modifier locus first appears with A is pA, whereas the probability that it first appears with a is qA, the two selective pressures given by equations (33) and (34) cancel out on average. Similarly, with recombination shuffling M alleles between backgrounds, the advantage of increasing sex in males and the disadvantage of increasing sex in females largely cancel, such that the last term in (32) tends to be small. Furthermore, deterministic two-locus simulations indicate that in the absence of recombination, fully asexual mutants (hMδσ = −σ) that occur linked to the femalebeneficial allele generally reach fixation within females, leading to the loss of males and of the male-beneficial allele (after which alleles increasing sex cannot benefit anymore from hitchhiking with the male-beneficial allele). Accordingly, in our multilocus simulations, we always found that the population evolves toward complete loss of sex under sexually antagonistic selection, for various values of recombination rates (including total map lengths, R, of 0 and 0.001), selection parameters and numbers of loci (results not shown).
INVASION OF A NEW MODIFIER AT
MUTATION–SELECTION BALANCE
To study the case of mutation–selection balance we assume that
♀♂
equation (32). Note that equation (35) is not defined when Mm females are fully asexual (hMδσ = −σ); in this case, the leading eigenvalue is given by
λ≈1+ 1s♀(s♀h♀)2(1+r)(u−s♀h♀pA) (36) 2
showing that selection on the asexual mutant vanishes if s♀ = 0 or if s♂ = s♀ (in which case pA ≈ u/s♀h♀).
When c > 1, indirect selection will generally be rather weak
relative to the cost of sex when selection occurs at a single locus,
but may become important if many loci are subject to deleterious
mutations with stronger effects in males. In the following, we use
our previous results to determine what the ES rate of sex should
be in the limit of an infinite number of loci with identical mutation
rate and selection parameters (s♀, h♀, s♂, h♂). We assume a fixed
mutation rate per haploid genome U, so that in the infinitesimal
limit the mutation rate per locus (u) and the equilibrium frequency
of each deleterious allele (pA) are both very small. In this case,
selection against sex generated by dominance in females (sdom) M
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
 becomes negligible relative to selection generated by differences in selection between males and females (sdiff ), because the latter
M
is proportional to pA, whereas the former is proportional to p2A
(see eqs. 17 and 18). Although linkage will affect sdiff , one cannot M
integrate the QLE expression over a continuous genome because sdiff diverges as r tends to zero (see eq. 21). However, simulation
M
results obtained for a map length of R = 10 morgans are often very close to results obtained under free recombination. Assuming r = 1/2 between each pair of loci, equation (21) gives
sdiff ≈ dσM(s♂h♂ − s♀h♀) M
× [σ s♂h♂ + 3(c(1 − σ) + σ)s♀h♀] 􏰗
× c(1+σ)[c(1−σ)+σ] pqA,
 allele A is disfavored (s , s < 0), and generated at a small rate u per generation by mutation from allele a. Deleterious mutations favor sex when their deleterious effect is stronger in males than in females (s♂ < s♀ < 0), because sexual females benefit from the stronger purge occurring in males (Agrawal 2001; Siller 2001; Hadany and Beker 2007). The strength of this effect is given by equation (21), with aA♀ ≈ −s♀h♀ and aA♂ ≈ −s♂h♂(assuming pA is small, while h♀ and h♂ are not too small). As above, a local stability analysis gives the same result as the QLE to the first order in δσ (for arbitrary c), whereas for c = 1 one can obtain an expression for the leading eigenvalue λ valid for any δσ.
σ[c(1−σ)+2σ]3
A
(37)
where the sum in the last equation is over all selected loci. Finally, from equation (27) we have
􏰗 􏰗
pAqA ≈ AA
U [c (1 − σ) + 2σ]
pA ≈−s♂h♂σ+s♀h♀[c(1−σ)+σ],
(38)
  λ≈1
+ hMδσ(s♂h♂ − s♀h♀)[s♀h♀(1 + 4r) + s♂h♂(σ + hMδσ)]pA
2r(σ + hMδσ)(1 + σ)(1 + σ + hMδσ) (35)
(assuming pA is small). Assuming c = 1 + O(ξ2) (weak cost of sex) introduces the same term as on the last line of
where U is the genomic mutation rate per haploid genome (recall
that s♀, s♂ < 0). The ES rate of sex corresponds to the value of
σ for which scost + sMdiff = 0, where (from eq. 16) M
scost =−dσ c−1 . (39) M M c (1 − σ) + 2σ
As long as selection is stronger in males than females (s♂h♂ < s♀h♀ < 0), this ES frequency of sex is predicted to be positive. Comparing equations (30)–(31) with equations (37)–(38), one can remark that sex-specific dominance (h♀ ̸= h♂) has more importance in the case of sexually antagonistic mutations (due to the
  EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 565

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
fact that under weak selection polymorphism can be maintained only if h♀ ̸= h♂) than in the case of deleterious mutations, where dominance simply reduces the effective strength of selection to s♀h♀ and s♂h♂.
Multilocus Simulations
We compared analytical predictions with individual-based simulation results for the case of sexually antagonistic selection and the case of deleterious mutations maintained at mutation–selection balance with different selection coefficients in males and females. The simulation program (written in C++ and available on request) represents a population of constant size N. Individuals are diploid and possess two copies of a chromosome of map length R (all results shown in this article have been obtained with R = 10 morgans, to mimic a whole genome). Each generation, the number of new mutations per chromosome is sampled from a Poisson distribution with parameter U. Fitness is multiplicative across loci, and all mutations have the same selection and dominance coefficients (s♀, h♀ in females, s♂, h♂ in males)—we will also consider distributions of mutational effects, as discussed later. Generations are nonoverlapping. For each of the N offspring of the next generation a parental female is chosen, the probability of sampling female k being proportional to
♀􏰠 􏰘 2􏰙􏰡
Wk 1 − σk 1 − c 􏰠♀􏰠􏰘2􏰙􏰡􏰡, (40)
E♀Wk 1−σk 1−c
which is the fitness of female k multiplied by the number of offspring she produces, divided by the same quantity averaged over all females. In the case where no male is present in the population
the terms between brackets in the equation above are changed to 1 − σk (as sexual reproduction is not possible). The offspring is then produced sexually with probability 2σk /[c(1 − σk ) + 2σk ], in which case a father is sampled over all male individuals (the probability of sampling father k being proportional to Wk♂/W♂). Meiosis then occurs in both parents; the number of cross-overs at meiosis is sampled from a Poisson distribution with parameter R, and the density of cross-overs is constant along the chromosome. If the female offspring is produced asexually, her genome is a copy of the maternal genome. Sexually produced offspring become male or female with probability 1/2; the population sex ratio is thus let free to vary, and tends to be female biased when σ < 1. The program starts with all chromosomes free of mutation, during the first 2000 generations all females have the same rate of sex σinit (we used both σinit = 0.01 and σinit = 1). Then, mutations at the modifier locus (which is located at the midpoint of the chromosome) are introduced at a rate 10−4 per generation. Each time, with probability 0.5, the rate of sex coded by the new allele is sampled from a uniform distribution between 0 and 1, whereas with probability 0.5, it equals the value of the allele before mutation plus a random number between −0.1 and 0.1 (if the new rate of sex is negative it is set to zero, whereas if it is greater than 1, it is set to 1). The rate of sex of a female is simply the average of its two alleles at the modifier locus (no dominance). The program runs for 2 million generations and records the average values of modifier alleles in males and females every 100 generations. The equilibrium rate of sex is obtained by averaging over the last 1.9 × 106 generations.
Figure 1 shows the average rate of sex measured during simulations as a function of the cost of sex c, for stronger (left) and weaker (right) selection. In both cases, the initial rate of sex was σinit = 1; however, we ran additional simulations starting
   1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
                                                                                                                                       1.2
1.4 c 1.6
1.8 2.0
1.2 1.4
c 1.6 1.8 2.0
Figure 1. Equilibriumrateofsexσasafunctionofthecostofsexc.Simulationresults(points)arecomparedtoanalyticalresultswithand without sex differences in selection using equations (37)–(39) and (41), respectively. Left: s♀ = s♂ = −0.05 (black squares, dotted curve), s♀ = s♂ = −0.15 (black circles, dashed curve), s♀ = −0.05, s♂ = −0.15 (white squares, solid curve). Right: same for s♀ = s♂ = −0.05 (black squares, dotted curve), s♀ = s♂ = −0.01 (white circles, dashed-dotted curve), s♀ = −0.01, s♂ = −0.05 (white squares, solid curve). Other parameter values are U = 1, N = 20, 000, h♀ = h♂ = 0.5, map length R = 10, 2 × 106 generations (in simulations). Error bars are smaller than the size of symbols.
 566 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012

         from σinit = 0.01 (for the same values of U, s♀, s♂ and c as in Fig. 1), which gave identical results. Figure 1 shows that stronger selection in males (white squares) can greatly increase the ES rate of sex when the cost of sex c is not too high. Furthermore, it shows that the prediction obtained from equations (37) and (39) is often rather good (solid curves), again when c is not too high (note that the analytical model assumes weak modifier effects, while in the simulations mutants coding for any rate of sex between 0 and 1 can appear at every generation). Additional simulation results for different values of U and R are given in the Supplementary File 2 (Fig. S1), showing that analytical predictions remain correct for higher values of U, as long as the genome map length is not too small.
When s♀ = s♂, sdiff equals zero but deleterious mutations M
still favor sex due to finite population size effects (N is set to 20,000 in the simulations). Specifically, finite population size generates an excess of heterozygotes at each locus (in particular when σ is low), which favors sex when mutations are additive (Roze and Michod 2010), and it also generates negative linkage disequilibria among loci (the Hill–Robertson effect) that also favor sex through selection for recombination (e.g., Otto and Barton 1997, 2001; Barton and Otto 2005; Keightley and Otto 2006; Roze and Michod 2010). We can use results from a previous QLE model (Roze and Michod 2010) to obtain an expression for indirect selection generated by finite population size when s♀ = s♂. Although this expression is a very complicated function of the parameters, it can be shown that when U is high and σ is low, indirect selection is dominated by selection for recombination (when h♀ = h♂ = 1/2), which is approximately
α♀ = log(−s ♀ ) and α♂ = log(−s ♂ ) from a bivariate Gaussian distribution, where α♀ and α♂ have means μ♀ , μ♂ , standard deviations γ♀, γ♂, and where ρ measures the correlation between α♀ and α♂ (−s ♀ and −s ♂ thus follow lognormal distributions). Figure 2 shows results for γ♀ = γ♂ = γ, choosing values of μ♀ and μ♂ so that s♀ = −0.05 and s♂ = −0.15 (as in Fig. 1 left). We considered three different values of γ (0.2, 0.5, and 0.8), that generate distributions of s ♀ and s ♂ with different degrees of overlap (panels A–C, Fig. 2). For each of these bivariate distributions, we explored the effect of the correlation coefficient ρ on the ES rate of sex. As shown by Figure 2, the variance of the distributions and the correlation coefficient have little effect on the ES rate of sex: when the overlap between the distributions of s♀ and s♂ is substantial (γ = 0.8), the rate of sex decreases slightly for low ρ (likely due to the fact that some mutations have stronger effect in females than in males and thus disfavor sex), but the effect is minor.
Equation (37) predicts that selection occurring only in males (s♀ = 0, s♂ ̸= 0) should favor sex. This stems from the fact that females who engage in sex more often tend to produce fitter sons, and thus have a higher fitness through sons. This effect vanishes, however, when one of the genotypes is completely asexual (as shown by eq. 36): the advantage of producing better sons disappears when females never (or rarely) engage in sex. Figure 3 shows simulation results for s♀ = 0, s♂ = −0.15. Here, the simulation program was constrained so that mutations at the modifier locus only change the rate of sex by a small value up to ±0.02 (starting from σ = 1). In this case, simulation results (squares) fit the analytical prediction obtained from equation (19) (curve). When maximum mutational steps at the modifier locus are increased from 0.02 to 0.05, however, the simulations become absorbed at σ = 0 when c ≥ 1.2, at which point males disappear (in this case the simulation has to be stopped before 2 × 106 generations, because mutations accumulate rapidly in the population). This result may seem surprising at first: for example, for c = 1.2, Figure 3 shows that the ES rate of sex is around 0.5, in which case asexual mutants cannot occur when mutational steps are 0.05; however, Figure 4 shows that an evolutionary branching occurs, leading to a first lineage evolving toward higher rates of sex and a second lineage toward lower rates of sex. This branching represents a group of male specialists (top branch), whose genomes are relatively purged of mutations and who have relatively high male mating success, and a group of female specialists (bottom branch), who bear a higher mutational load but a lower cost of sex. When this second lineage reaches σ = 0 , males within the first lineage are no longer able to mate with receptive females in the second lineage, and the first lineage is driven extinct (due to the cost of sex). With mutational steps of 0.02, no branching occurs (although we cannot exclude the
rec 67.89s2U2 sM ≈dσM Nσeff5
(41)
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
   with σeff = σ/[c(1 − σ) + σ]. The nonsolid curves in Figure 1 show that the ES rate of sex obtained using this expression provides an accurate prediction, unless again the cost of sex is high (eq. 41 and the complete expression obtained from Roze and Michod [2010] give almost undistinguishable curves—not shown). Increasing c decreases the effective rate of sex, which makes the QLE approximation less robust. Note that Roze and Michod (2010)’s model represents a hermaphroditic population (and not a dioecious population as simulated here); however, simulations show that the ES rate of sex is very similar in hermaphroditic and dioecious populations when s ♀ = s ♂ , as long as the total population size remains the same (results not shown).
To investigate the effect of variation in the selective effects in males and females, we used a modified version of the program where for each new mutation s♀ and s♂ were sampled from a bivariate probability distribution: more precisely, we sampled
 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 567

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
  40
AB
30
0.2 0.5
25 20 15 10
5
0.1 0.0
                                                                                                     0.5 0.4
20
10
0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0
0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2
              s,s s,s 1.0
    C
0.8
20
0.8 15
D
                      10
5
0.1 0.0
0.6 0.4 0.2
                                                                   0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2
s,s
0.2 0.4
0.6 0.8 1.0
        Figure 2. Equilibriumrateofsexσwithlog-normallydistributedmutationaleffectsinmalesandfemales.(A–C)themarginaldistributions of s♀ (solid) and s♂ (dashed) are shown for different standard deviations, γ, of log(−s♀) and log(−s♂) (see text for more explanation), where in all cases, s♀ = −0.05 and s♂ = −0.15. (D) the equilibrium rate of sex as a function of ρ (the correlation coefficient between log(−s♀) and log(−s♂)), for γ = 0.2 (solid line, black squares), γ = 0.5 (dashed line, black circles), and γ = 0.8 (dotted line, white squares). The lines simply connect simulation results and do not correspond to analytical predictions. The cost of sex c is 1.2, all other parameters as in Figure 1.
  1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
possibility that branching would occur if the simulation were run much longer).
Studying the combined effect of deleterious mutations (which favor sex when selection is stronger in males) and sexually antagonistic mutations (which disfavor sex) is important because both types of mutation occur in many species. A thorough simulation study is challenging, however, as little is known about the relative rates of occurrence and distributions of effects (s and h) of these different types of mutations (as well as possible covariances between effects), and the possibly relevant parameter space would thus be very large. Although we leave a more complete treatment to future studies, Figure S2 in Supplementary File 2 shows that in the presence of deleterious mutations, intermediate rates of sex can be maintained even when a substantial number of loci are segregating for sexually antagonistic variation (it also shows that extrapolation from the two-locus model generally still provides correct quantitative predictions). In the next section, we suggest possible experimental tests of the overall direction and strength of selection for sex arising from differences in selection between the sexes.
                          c
                            1.2 1.4
1.6 1.8 2.0
Figure 3. Equilibrium rate of sex σ as a function of the cost of sex c, for s♀ = 0, s♂ = −0.15 (other parameters are as in Fig. 1). Solid curve: analytical prediction from equations (37)–(39). Dots: simulation results, where mutations at the modifier locus change the rate of sex by a small value up to ±0.02 (white squares) or ±0.05 (black circles). Note that because evolution proceeds more slowly than when mutant modifier alleles can code for any rate of sex, σ is averaged over the last 1.5 × 106 generations (instead of the last 1.9 × 106 generations as in Fig. 1), unless σ goes to zero.
 568 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012

 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
500 000
time
1.0 106
1.5
106
2.0 106
100 000
time
200 000
300 000
400 000
500 000
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
Figure 4. Evolutionary trajectories when selection acts only on males: these trajectories correspond to the points in Figure 2 for c = 1.2 and maximum mutational steps of ±0.02 (left) and ±0.05 (right). Each modifier allele whose frequency is above 0.1 is represented by a point (darker points correspond to higher frequencies); the line shows the proportion of males in the population. Time is in generations (frequencies are measured every 100 generations).
Discussion
In this article, we derived expressions for the strength of selection acting on a sex modifier locus due to differential selection between the sexes. As was argued by others before, sex is favored whenever the direction of selection is the same in males and females and selection is stronger in males, whereas sex is typically disfavored when selection is stronger in females or acts in opposite directions in males and females (sexually antagonistic selection). Importantly, our results show that under random mating, differential selection between the sexes generates a selective force on the modifier that is larger in magnitude than other forces acting on sex in similar models when s♀ = s♂ (in particular, in the case of deleterious mutations maintained at low frequency). This indicates that even if a limited fraction of loci are differentially selected in males and females, the net effect on selection for sex may nevertheless be quite important. The use of approximations (such as the QLE) allows us to obtain simple expressions that can be used to generate predictions on the relative importance of different mechanisms selecting for sex. Using multilocus simulations, we showed that despite numerous approximations, these expressions often yield correct predictions for the ES rates of sex (see Figs. 1 and S1). This body of theory provides us with preliminary answers to important questions, such as: Can sexual selection favor the evolution of high rates of sex in the face of strong costs? Do the advantages of purging deleterious mutations more effectively in males disappear if selection is weak or absent in females? May the positive effect on sex generated by stronger selection in males be counteracted by the effect of sexually antagonistic loci, as there is likely to be more genetic variation at the latter loci (higher pAqA)? We discuss these different questions in turn.
Can sexual selection favor the evolution of high rates of sex? From our results, moderate to high (but not obligate) sex
may evolve when the cost of sex is strong (see Figs. 1, S1, and S2). Hadany and Beker (2007) found situations where obligate sex is favored over facultative sex under a twofold cost of sex, however, it required high mutation rates and strong selection: for example, Figure 2 in Hadany and Beker (2007) shows that σ = 1 is favored over σ = 0.01 when the haploid mutation rate U is around 2, the strength of selection against mutations in females is s♀ = 0.05 and selection is about five or six times stronger in males. As shown in this article, reducing the strength of selection against mutations (Fig. 1) or reducing the mutation rate (Fig. S1) decreases selection for sex. Furthermore, Figure 3 in Hadany and Beker (2007) show that increasing the rate of sex of facultative sexuals makes it more difficult for obligate sex to be favored. This is confirmed by our multilocus simulations where obligate sex was always invaded by alleles reducing the degree of sex when the costs of sex were substantial (Figs. 1, S1, and S2). Nevertheless, it remains possible that high rates of sex may evolve when sexual selection acts in combination with other selective forces (such as Hill–Robertson effects generated by local drift in structured populations, or fluctuating epistasis generated by host–parasite coevolution); models combining these different effects are thus needed.
Do the advantages of purging deleterious mutations in males disappear if selection is weak or absent in females? Our results show that sex is generally favored when deleterious mutations are purged more efficiently from males, regardless of the strength of selection in females (eq. 23). This is not only because sexual females tend to be more fit on average, but also because they gain a fitness advantage from having fitter sons. Consequently, there need not be any selection on females (aA♀ = 0) for increased sex to evolve. That said, with only selection in males, sexual populations are susceptible to invasion by largeeffect mutations eliminating sex and hence eliminating males
EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 569

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
(Fig. 3). By contrast, ES rates of sex seem to depend less on the size of mutational steps when selection acts in both males and females, with good agreement between our analytical predictions (assuming weak modifier effects) and simulation results (where mutational steps can be of any size) as seen in Figures 1, S1, and S2.
Given that sex differences in selection are likely to give rise
to polymorphisms involving both deleterious mutations and sexu-
ally antagonistic alleles, is the net effect likely to favor or disfavor
sex? The answer to this question is largely an empirical issue,
depending on the relative frequencies of such mutations and their
effects (note that sexually antagonistic variation is likely to be
less important when the baseline rate of sex is low, as it is more
difficult to maintain such variation—see Appendix C). We can,
however, use our model to specify measurable quantities that can
be used to settle this question. From equation (21), and assum-
ing free recombination among loci (r = 1/2), selection on a sex
of these results). Although the previous arguments assume free
recombination, simulation results indicate that the overall selec-
tion for sex does not depend much on recombination rates as
long as the genome map length is not too small (Fig. S1). Simi-
larly, the strength of selection against sex generated by dominance
in females (sdom) can be estimated from the dominance compoM♀
modifier due to sex differences in selection is proportional to
Experimental evidence that sexual selection helps to purge the female mutation load remains scarce. A few studies have measured the effect of specific mutations on male and female fitness (see references in Whitlock and Agrawal [2009]): e.g., Sharp and Agrawal (2008) showed that among eight mutations that significantly decrease female fitness in Drosophila, five had stronger deleterious effects on total male fitness, one increased male fitness, while two had nonsignificant effects on males. Recently, Mallet and Chippindale (2011) measured inbreeding depression in male and female Drosophila, by creating either nearly homozygous or heterozygous individuals from 18 different haplotypes. Although inbreeding had similar effects on juvenile survival in males and females, it had stronger effects on male than female adult fitness; furthermore, effects on males and females were positively correlated across haplotypes. This type of evidence suggests that selection against deleterious mutations may indeed be stronger in males. However, these results stand in contrast to previous work that obtained a negative correlation between male and female adult fitness in a different D. melanogaster propulation (Chippindale et al. 2001), indicating the presence of substantial sexually antagonistic variation. Mallet and Chippindale (2011) argue that these contrasting results may be due to differences between Drosophila populations in terms of segregating sexually antagonistic variation. Another possible explanation could be that most mutations generating inbreeding depression have rather low-dominance coefficients, and thus have little effect on fitness in outbred populations (in which case the relative effect of sexually antagonistic variation becomes more important). Future empirical work should be aimed at quantifying the terms suggested above (additive variances and covariances in fitness) to determine whether differences between males and females represent a net cost or a net benefit to the evolution of sexual reproduction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J.-B. Andre ́, A. Agrawal, N. Barton, S. Proulx, and an anonymous reviewer for helpful suggestions and comments, and the genomics and computing service of Roscoff’s Biological Station for computing time. DR is funded by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (Hi-Flo project ANR-08-BLAN-0334-01) and by a research mobility grant from the Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique. SPO is funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
􏰭(a♂−a♀)(3θ♀a♀+θ♂a♂)piqi, where the sum is over all iiiii
selected loci (and θ♀, θ♂ are the female and male reproductive
values). The net direction of selection can thus be obtained from
the quantities V♀ = 2􏰭 (a♀)2 piqi, V♂ = 2􏰭 (a♂)2 piqi, and ♀♂􏰭♀A♂ii A ii
CA = i ai ai pi qi , which correspond to additive genetic vari-
ances and covariances in log fitness in males and females, as
explained below. In particular, starting with an obligately sexual
population (σ = 1, in which case θ♀ = θ♂ = 1/2), equation (21)
takes the simple form sdiff ≈ dσM(c/8)(V ♂ + 4C♀♂ − 3V ♀). M AAA
Expressions for variances in log fitness can be derived as follows:
assuming multiplicative effects of the selected loci (no epistasis)
and weak selection, the log fitness of a female can be written as
lnW♀ ≈ 􏰭 s♀[h♀(Xi1 + Xi2) +(1 − 2h♀)Xi1 Xi2], where Xi1, iii i
Xi2 are indicator variables equal to 1 if the female carries al-
lele 1 at locus i on its first and second haplotype, and 0 oth-
erwise. Using the expression of ai♀ given in equation (6), one
obtains that the genetic variance in log fitness among females (as-
suming Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium and linkage equilibrium) is
V♀≈􏰭[2(a♀)2piqi +(a♀ piqi)]=V♀+V♀(e.g.,Lynchand Gii i,i AD
Walsh 1998, p. 69). The additive and dominance components of
the variance (VA♀, and VD♀) can be measured using standard quan-
titative genetics methods. Some experimental designs may allow
one to estimate directly the three quantities V ♀ , V ♂ and C ♀♂ . In AAA
particular, Chippindale et al. (2001) used cytogenetic methods to
generate 40 Drosophila haplotypes, each of which was expressed
in both males and females in different genetic backgrounds. In the
case in which the different possible backgrounds correspond to
the different haplotypes, a simple calculation shows that the vari-
ances among haplotypes in male and female log fitness are VA♀/2
and V ♂ /2, while C ♀♂ is given by the covariance between the AA
log fitness of haplotypes when expressed in females versus males (see Supplementary File 2, which also shows simulation checks
nent of the female variance VD : indeed from equations (16) and (18), sdom is proportional to V ♀ = 􏰭 (a♀ pi qi )2, and simplifies
M ♀Dii,i
to sdom ≈ −dσM(c/2)V in the case where σ = 1.
MD
 570 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
FemalefitnessaregivenbyW♀ =W♀ =W♀ =1+s♀,W♀ = 11 13 33 12
Finally, genotype frequencies among juvenile males of the next generation are given by
􏰚􏰛
′ πiωj+1−δij πjωi
yij = ω (A6)
tot
(where δij = 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise), whereas genotype frequencies among juvenile females are given by
W♀ =W♀ =W♀ =1+s♀h♀, W♀ =W♀ =W♀ =1; male 14 23 34 22 24 44
fitness are given by the same expressions, replacing female by male symbols.
In our mutation–selection balance model, we will assume that allele A is disfavored in both males and females (s♀, s♂ < 0), and that mutation occurs at a small rate u from a to A (back mutation is ignored). Neglecting terms in u2, female genotype frequencies after mutation are given by
xmut = xsel +uxsel, xmut (1−u)xsel +2uxsel, 11 11 12 12 12 22
xmut = xsel + u 􏰚xsel + xsel􏰛 13 13 14 23
xmut = (1−u)xsel +uxsel, xmut (1−2u)xsel 14 14 24 22 22
xmut = (1−u)xsel +uxsel, xmut (1−2u)xsel 23 23 24 24 24
xmut = xsel +uxsel, xmut (1−u)xsel +2uxsel, 33 33 34 34 34 44
xmut = (1−2u)xsel .
44 44 (A3)
Frequencies in males after mutation are given by the same expressions, replacing x by y. The frequency of genotype j in the female
􏰠′􏰡 x′=1(1−σ)xmut+ωyij , (A7)
 ijT ijij totc
whereT =􏰭 [(1−σ )xmut +ω y′ /c],andσ istherateof
  gamete pool is given by ω /ω
j tot
ω =σ􏰜2xmut+xmut􏰝 1 2 11 12
, with
Appendix B
DERIVING RECURSIONS FOR ASSOCIATIONS
A recursion for D ̃ ♀MA can be derived as follows. In the following, ζ ̃♀U,V(k) stands for (ζ♀U(k1)ζ♀V(k2) + ζ♀V(k1)ζ♀U(k2))/2, and ζ ̃♀U(k) stands for
 ̃♀ ̃♂ ̃♂
ζU,∅(k ) (and similarly for ζU,V(k ) and ζU(k ) ). Following Kirkpatrick
et al. (2002), we proceed in two steps: we first express D ̃ ♀MA at the next generation, but using as “reference values” (the pl♀ in eq. 3) allele frequencies of the present generation; then, we update reference values. D ̃ ♀MA at the next generation, using as reference values allele frequencies of the present generation, is given by
i,j≥i ij ij
sex of females carrying genotype ij.
tot ij ij
 +σ+hMδσ􏰜xmut +(1−r)xmut +rxmut􏰝 213 1423
􏰫􏰣􏰦 􏰦 E ♀ ( 1 − σ k ) W ♀ ζ ̃ ♀
D ̃ ♀ ′ = MA
􏰣 1
􏰚1−σ 􏰚1−1􏰛􏰛W♀
􏰣σk ♀􏰦 Wk♂􏰤 ♂ ♂ +E♀ 2cWk E♂ W♂ (1−r)ζ ̃MA(k)+rζ ̃M,A(k)
􏰥􏰨􏰬
  σ􏰜􏰝 ♀kck
E
k MA(k)
 ω= 2xmut+xmut 2 2 22 12
+σ+hMδσ 􏰜xmut +r xmut +(1−r)xmut􏰝 22414 23
ω =σ+δσ􏰜2xmut+xmut􏰝 3 2 33 34
+σ+hMδσ 􏰜xmut +r xmut +(1−r)xmut􏰝 21314 23
ω =σ+δσ􏰜2xmut+xmut􏰝 4 2 44 34
+σ+hMδσ􏰜xmut+(1−r)xmut+rxmut􏰝, (A4) 224 1423
andωtot =ω1 +ω2 +ω3 +ω4.Thefrequencyofgenotypejin the male gamete pool is given by πj, with
􏰣􏰤 􏰥􏰦
+E♀ σk Wk♀ (1−r)ζ ̃♀MA(k) +rζ ̃♀M,A(k) 2c 􏰧
      +∇Mζ♂A(k) +∇Aζ♂M(k) +∇M∇A
The denominator of equation (B1) is the average number of daugh-
ters produced by a parental female. The different terms in the numerator correspond to the different possible origins of loci M and A present on the same chromosome of a daughter. If the daughter has been produced asexually, these loci were on the same chromosome in the mother (first term; each mother is weighted by the number of offspring she produces asexually). If she has been produced sexually, the chromosome is maternally inherited with probability 1/2, and the two loci were on the same chromosome in the mother with probability 1 − r, and on different chromosomes with probability r (second term). Finally, the third term corresponds to the case where the chromosome is paternally inherited: the probability that a chromosome is paternally inherited depends on the number of sexually produced females (first average), and each father is weighted by its relative contribution to
.
 (B1)
  1 π1 =2
1 π2 =2
1 π3 =2
􏰜 mut mut mut mut mut􏰝 2y11 +y12 +y13 +(1−r)y14 +ry23
 􏰜 mut 2y22
􏰜 mut 2y33
mut mut +y12 +y24
mut mut +y34 +y13
mut +r y14
mut +r y14
mut􏰝 +(1−r)y23
mut􏰝 +(1−r)y23
  1􏰜 mut
π4=2 2y44 +y34 +y24 +(1−r)y14 +ry23 .
(A5)
mut mut
mut mut􏰝
  572 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012

         themalegametepool,W♂/W♂.ThereferencevaluesinD ̃♀ ′ k ♀ ♀ MA
are allele frequencies in females (pM, pA), whereas references values in ζ ̃♂MA( j ) , ζ ̃♂M,A( j ) in the third term are allele frequencies in males (pM♂, pA♂), which generates the terms in ∇M = pM♂ − pM♀ a n d ∇ A = p A♂ − p A♀ .
The effect of updating reference values to allele frequencies in females at the next generation is given by
 ̃♀′′ ̃♀′ ♀♀
DMA = DMA − 􏰓pM 􏰓pA (B2)
(e.g., eq. 15 in Kirkpatrick [2002]). Because we want to express D ̃♀MA to the first order in δσ and in selection coefficients, it is sufficient to express 􏰓pM♀ to the first order in δσ in the absence of selection at locus A, and 􏰓pA♀ to the first order in s♀, s♂, when δσ = 0. From equations (11) and (13) we have
􏰤 ♀ ♂􏰥(c−1)[c(1−σ)+σ]
[c(1−σ)+2σ]2
MALE–FEMALE DIFFERENCES AND EVOLUTION OF SEX
 ̃♂ ′′
DM,A =dσM
Appendix C
pqMA. (B10)
aA −aA
 􏰓 p M♀ = − d σ M ( 2 c − 1 ) p q M − σ ∇ M , 2[c(1−σ)+σ]
􏰓pM♂=dσM pqM−σ∇M. 2σ
σ c(1−σ)+2σ
Plugging this expression into equations (B3) and (B4) gives
♀ ♂ c−1
􏰓pM =􏰓pM =−dσMc(1−σ)+2σ pqM. (B6)
or
s ♂ ,
asexual females if its effect on female fitness is sufficiently positive. Specifically, if the chance of a female reproducing asexually (1 − σeff ) times the female fitness with the allele is greater than one, then the allele spreads regardless of any additional benefit that it may (or may not) obtain by reproducing sexually.
From (C1) to (C4), one obtains that when selection is weak andtherateofsexσeff nottoosmall,pA =0andpA =1areboth unstable if
( B 3 )
STABILITY OF POLYMORPHIC EQUILIBRIUM UNDER SEXUALLY ANTAGONISTIC SELECTION
Equation (29) gives an expression for the equilibrium frequency of allele A under antagonistic selection (s♀ and s♂ of opposite signs), when δσ = 0 and selection is weak. Finding equilibria when selection is arbitrarily strong is difficult; however, one can perform a local stability analysis to predict under which conditions equilibria pA = 0 and pA = 1 are both unstable, in which case polymorphism must be maintained in the population. In the following, we call σeff the “effective rate of sex” in the population (proportion of sexually produced females): σeff = σ/[c(1 − σ) + σ]. One obtains that pA = 0 is unstable if either
(1−σ )(1+s♀)>1 (C1) eff
s♀h♀ + s♂h♂σeff − s♀h♀s♂h♂ (1 − σeff ) > 0, (C2) while pA = 1 is unstable if either
 (B4) This gives us a recursion for ∇M. Solving at equilibrium gives an
 expression for ∇M at QLE:
or ∇M = dσM c (1 + σ) pqM . (B5)
    Expressions for ∇A, 􏰓pA♀, and 􏰓pA♂ to the first order in s♀, s♂, when δσ = 0 are given by equations (26) and (27). Putting everything together, one obtains
 ̃♀ ′′ DMA =
􏰘 s♀􏰙
(1−σeff) 1−1+s♀ >1 (C3)
s♀ ♀ s♂ ♂
− 1+s♀(1−h )− 1+s♂(1−h )σeff
s♀(1 − h♀) s♂(1 − h♂)
− 1+s♀ 1+s♂ (1−σeff)>0. (C4)
Interestingly, conditions (C1) and (C3) do not depend on
     ̃♂􏰥 􏰤 ̃♀ 2[c(1−σ)+σ]
 ̃♂ 􏰥􏰦 􏰤 ♀ ♂􏰥 c+σ(2c−1) (B7)
 ̃♀ 􏰣 􏰤 ̃♀
2c(1−σ)DMA +σ (1−r) DMA +DMA +r DM,A +DM,A
reflecting the fact that an allele can establish among the
 −dσM aA −aA [c(1−σ)+2σ]2 pqMA .
Recursions for D ̃♀M,A, D ̃♂MA, and D ̃♂M,A can be derived similarly.
 One obtains  ̃♀′′
􏰤 ♀ ♂􏰥(c−1)[c(1−σ)+σ]
−dσM aA −aA [c(1−σ)+2σ]2 pqMA,
(B9)
DM,A
c(1−σ)  ̃♀
= c(1−σ)+σ DM,A −dσM
c + σ
×[c (1 − σ) + 2σ]2 pqMA
􏰤♀ ♂􏰥 aA −aA
 (B8)
h♂ 1 − h♂
   ̃♂′′ 1􏰣 􏰤 ̃♀  ̃♂􏰥
♀σeff. (C5) This last result corresponds to equation (7) in Kidwell et al.
(1977) when σeff = 1. Although polymorphism cannot be maintained when h♀ = h♂ = 1/2 with weak selection (C5), it can with stronger selection (C1–C4). Higher fitness in heterozygous
􏰤 ̃♀
DMA =2 (1−r) DMA+DMA +r DM,A+DM,A
 ̃♂ 􏰥􏰦
−s♂ ♀σeff <s♀<−s♂
h 1−h
    EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012 573

         D. ROZE AND S. P. OTTO
individuals favors the maintenance of polymorphism. Most importantly, these equations show that as the rate of sex evolves, different loci subject to sexually antagonistic selection are likely
to be polymorphic. With infrequent sex, only alleles with weak effects in females (s♀ low) will satisfy these conditions, whereas with frequent sex larger s♀ is necessary.
 574 EVOLUTION FEBRUARY2012
   Supporting Information
The following supporting information is available for this article:
Figure S1. Equilibrium rate of sex σ as a function of the deleterious mutation rate U.
Figure S2. Top: Equilibrium rate of sex σ as a function of the cost of sex c with loci subject to both sexually antagonistic selection and mutation-selection balance. Bottom: Amount of genetic variance maintained at equilibrium at loci under deleterious mutation (higher values) and at loci under sexually antagonistic selection (lower values).
Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
 