  Syst. Biol. 45(2):190-222, 1996
PHYLOGENETIC HYPOTHESES OF THE RELATIONSHIPS OF ARTHROPODS TO PRECAMBRIAN AND CAMBRIAN PROBLEMATIC FOSSIL TAXA
BENJAMIN M. WAGGONER
Department of Integrative Biobgy, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA; E-mail: bmiv@uclink2.berkeley.edu
Abstract.—A number of Vendian (latest Precambrian) body fossils have traditionally been considered arthropods or arthropodlike organisms. Several Cambrian "weird wonders" have also been linked with the arthropods. However, these relationships are difficult to express in traditional Linnean systematics. I present a morphological cladistic analysis of seven Vendian "arthropodlike" taxa compared with 21 representative Cambrian arthropods, lobopods, and weird wonders. Four arthropods from the later Phanerozoic (a pycnogonid, a monuran, and the problematic Chebnielbn and Arthropleura), five extant tardigrades, two extant kinorhynchs, and an extant priapulid, myriapod, pycnogonid, and onychophoran are also included. Monophyly of the Arthropoda is supported, but the anomalocarids and their relatives (Anomalopoda) fall out very close to the base of the traditional Arthropoda and should be included within it. The relationships among arthropods with uniramous appendages are not well resolved, but the group does not appear to be monophyletic. The biramous arthropods do form a clade and are divided into a crustaceanomorph clade and an arachnomorph clade that includes the trilobites. Most Vendian arthropodlike fossils form two clades, the Vendiamorpha and the Sprigginidae, in the arthropod stem group. The Lobopoda is a monophyletic clade with three branches: tardigrades, onychophorans, and marine lobopods. An unranked taxonomic scheme is proposed for the major clades identified here. There is no compelling reason to accept the hypothesis that the Vendian organisms included here are not metazoans. [Precambrian; Vendian; Ediacara fauna; Cambrian; problematica; arthropod; lobopod.]
There is something about writing about arthropod phylogeny that brings out the worst in people.
—J. W. Hedgpeth (Schram, 1981)
The soft-bodied megafossils of the Vendian or Ediacaran (late Precambrian or Neoproterozoic) have classically been considered metazoans in extant phyla, often in or near extant classes or orders (e.g., Glaessner, 1984). However, a number of dissenting opinions place most or all of these fossils in an extinct kingdom Vendobionta (Seilacher, 1989, 1992; Bergstrom, 1991), an extinct metazoan phylum (Buss and Seilacher, 1994), or an extant nonmetazoan kingdom (e.g., Zhuravlev, 1993; Retallack, 1994), thereby denying them any direct significance for early metazoan evolution. Obstacles to considering the "Vendobionta" as early metazoans include the time gap between the disappearance of Vendian biotas and the appearances of Cambrian faunas, the lack of V endian-type soft-bodied organisms in the Cambrian and later Lagerstatten; and supposed mor-
phological disparity between most Vendian organisms and their Phanerozoic successors.
Resolution of this debate would be desirable, because our understanding and interpretation of the Precambrian-Cambrian transition is colored by our taxonomic pronouncements. The magnitude of whatever extinction took place between the Vendian and Cambrian is an example of this. If the Vendian organisms form a monophyletic kingdom Vendobionta, with a Bauplan fundamentally different from anything known from the Phanerozoic, then obviously an extinction event separates the Vendian and Cambrian. In fact, if the Vendobiontan hypothesis (Seilacher, 1989, 1992) is correct, the largest mass extinction in history separates the Vendian and Cambrian, at least in terms of the rank of the taxa that it claimed; no other mass extinction, as far as we know, has destroyed an entire kingdom. Any number of scenarios can be devised for said extinction, from vulcanism or bolide impact (Felitsyn et al., 1989) to
190
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 191
the evolution of predators (McMenamin, 1986; Seilacher, 1989). However, if the Vendian organisms were early representatives of several extant taxa, then the presumed extinction event loses magnitude: perhaps the difference between Vendian and Cambrian biotas is due more to rapid diversification and pseudoextinction, possibly coupled with changes in taphonomic conditions, than to mass extinction in the usual sense. It is therefore important to document and test all possible cases of phylogenetic continuity across the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary. In the absence of a complete fossil record, this is the only way to assess the true significance of the Vendian fossils for the Phanerozoic history of metazoans.
A time gap in the fossil record of a presumed clade does not by itself disprove relationship; e.g., the 65 million year gap between the youngest fossil coelacanth and Latimeria chalumnae. At most Vendian localities, the interval between the Vendian and Cambrian assemblages is obscured by unconformities (reviewed by Jenkins, 1989; Conway Morris, 1993a) a n d / o r facies change (e.g., Pirrus, 1992). Scarcity of Vendian-type preservation and faunas in later Lagerstiitten is also not an obstacle. Although Burgess Shale-type Lagerstatten and their distinctive faunas disappear after the Cambrian (Allison and Briggs, 1991), this does not mean that the Burgess Shale organisms are unrelated to anything living and form the kingdom Burgess-Shaleo'bionta.
The third potential barrier to establishing links, morphological differences, is less easily surmounted. Documenting or disproving phylogenetic links between Vendian and Phanerozoic taxa is made difficult by rarity and poor preservation of key fossils and lack of characters for analysis. Thus, a number of Cambrian "medusoids" that have been claimed as Ediacaran survivors have turned out to be no such thing (Barskov and Zhuravlev, 1988; Dzik, 1991; Conway Morris, 1993a). Some past identifications, such as the identification of the Cambrian Xenusion as a V endian-type "frondlike organism" (Tarlo, 1967; Mc-
Menamin, 1986; McMenamin and McMenamin, 1990), are probably ingeniously wrong (Dzik and Krumbiegel, 1989). Other Phanerozoic fossils seem to be comparable with Vendian forms, but a relationship cannot be confirmed because of poor preservation, morphological simplicity, or lack of study (e.g., Pickerill, 1982; Gehling, 1991).
Nevertheless, several lineages do seem to cross the boundary, including (1) two lineages of frondlike fossils, one of which is probably related to extant pennatulaceans (Conway Morris, 1993a), (2) probable sea anemones (Gehling, 1991; Conway Morris, 1993a), and (3) annulated discoidal fossils resembling hydrozoan chondrophorines (Conway Morris, 1993a; Waggoner and Collins, 1995). Vendian strata have also yielded a plausible echinoderm (Gehling, 1987), at least one sponge (Gehling, 1993), and a few jellyfishlike forms with definite fourfold symmetry (Fedonkin, 1985a, 1985b; Gehling, 1991). A number of trace fossil genera also cross the VendianCambrian boundary (Fedonkin, 1985c), as do the sabelliditids, which may be pogonophoran relatives (Sokolov, 1968; Fedonkin, 1985a).
The problem of arthropod ancestors in the Vendian has not been settled. Nevertheless, Vendian fossils with a remarkable resemblance to trilobites have been found and illustrated, although not yet formally described (Gehling, 1991: pi. 4, fig. 4; Jenkins, 1992: fig. 15). Other Vendian arthropodlike fossils, such as Praecambridium and Vendia, have classically been considered arthropods or near-arthropods (Glaessner, 1984; Fedonkin, 1985a, 1985b; Gehling, 1991; Simonetta and Insom, 1993), whereas other workers have focused on differences between these forms and arthropods (e.g., Bergstrom, 1991; Hou et al., 1991). In this paper, I attempt to identify and support links between Cambrian and Vendian forms, using cladistic methods.
CONCEPTS AND METHODS
Weird Wonders: A Cladistic Definition The term weird wonder was introduced
by Gould (1989) and has since become a
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  192 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
common term for a fossil organism that
lacks obvious similarities to any living tax-
on. In a cladistic sense, a weird wonder is
an organism with numerous autapomor-
phies and few synapomorphies; an organ-
ism is not a weird wonder if it is only
poorly preserved or poorly known (Yoch-
elson, 1991). Both fossil and living organ-
isms can be weird wonders (for some liv-
ing ones, see Haszprunar et al., 1991). A
living or fossil weird wonder for which
synapomorphies are documented loses its
weirdness: when Hallncigenia was reinter-
preted as a marine lobopod (Ramskold, ic; shunting problematica into their own 1992), it became possible to fit Hallucigenia kingdoms or phyla is itself a form of into a systematic hierarchy. Weirdness may
vary among levels in a hierarchical taxonomy. Sagitta, for instance, is not a weird chaetognath (it shares many synapomorphies with other chaetognaths) nor is it weird on the kingdom level (it has many animal synapomorphies). Sagitta is a weird wonder with respect to other invertebrate phyla because it shows few obvious synapomorphies with members of other phyla. Bengtson (1986:3) defined a phylum as "a group of organisms of uncertain taxonomic affinities, that is, a problematic taxon." In other words, a phylum is a weird wonder, i.e., an expression of ignorance as to the affinities of its constituent organisms with all others. The Vendian macrofossils are weird wonders indeed; they have been allied at various times with four out of the traditional five living kingdoms and with at least two extinct kingdom-level taxa.
This treatment of the Vendian fossils is an example of a general tendency in dealing with problematic fossil taxa, to treat them as belonging "nowhere among the known animals of this or any former earth" (Gould, 1989:134), with "no . . . persuasive clues to homology, or genealogical relationship with any other group of organisms" (Gould, 1989:193), whose "bodyplans do not 'fif any of the groups known either as fossils or as extant forms" (Hall, 1992:28), and so on. As Conway Morris (1993b:224) noted, Precambrian and Cambrian problematic fossils are "in imminent danger of elevation to a classic status as evolutionary enigmas." This approach is
"shoehorning" (Gehling, 1991). As has been shown for the Vendian organisms, such a taxonomy and such a view of weird wonders will color our perceptions of organismal diversification, extinction rate and magnitude, and even global ecology as much if not more so than shoehorning them into extant taxa. As Bengtson (1986: 4) wrote,
the concept [of the phylum], as based on living organisms, is not a suitable tool to analyze the history of metazoan diversification except under the assumption that present-day phyla represent the full or almost full spectrum of body plans available to animals and that phyla seldom or never become extinct.
Two things need to be done. First, problematic fossils must be incorporated into phylogenetic analyses. By definition, their synapomorphies with other taxa will not be obvious; these synapomorphies must be searched for and documented. Proposing homologies between weird wonders and well-known taxa may require some risktaking, and the taxonomic position of weird wonders may be labile or uncertain; this is, however, preferable both to shoehorning them into extant taxa and to refusing to deal with their relationships.
Second, taxonomic schemes should be unranked (de Queiroz and Gauthier, 1992) or several ranks must be created between kingdom and phylum. Valentine (1973) took a step towards this by proposing that the rank of superphylum is useful for expressing relationships among animal phyla and could be used to accommodate the
having taxonomic repercussions; Burgess Shale fossils such as Anomabcaris, Opabinia, Nectocaris, and especially Hallucigenia (before it was inverted [Ramskold, 1992]) are often cited as single species "worthy" of their own phyla. Anderson (1993) formally proposed eight monospecifk phyla for Vendian and Cambrian weird wonders. Such a nihilistic taxonomy leaves no framework to address the questions of interrelationships among phyla; a phylum simply is. Erecting phyla for problematic organisms makes them no less problemat-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 193
Vendian organisms. The interrelationships between high-level clades can in principle be known; the problem is that in traditional Linnean taxonomy there is no standard way to express such relationships. When an organism cannot be shoehorned into any extant phylum, there is no alternative but to call it a weird wonder, with no relationship to any extant taxon. Although the organism must be related to extant organisms in some way, this relationship cannot be expressed in traditional Linnean taxonomy—and this may be quite misleading.
Vendian Fossils and Metazoan Phytogeny
Some scientists have objected to applying cladistics to problematic fossils. Simonetta (1990) claimed that in the early history of taxa there is a phase in which advanced characters are acquired repeatedly and at random by various members of the group, so that organisms appear as mosaics of advanced and archaic features and convergence is rampant; this situation will render the principle of parsimony useless. Gould (1989) proposed a similar "grab-bag" model for early metazoan evolution: the characters of weird wonders represent "a broad range of latent and recruitable structures" (1989:217) common to a wide range of metazoan lines. Such latent characters could be activated in genealogically distant lineages, again the result is rampant homoplasy.
These hypotheses are testable. If Simonetta's (1990) hypothesis or Gould's (1989) grab-bag model were true, consistency indices of cladograms that include weird wonders should be abnormally low: these predictions can be tested by doing the analysis. These hypotheses may justify the use of unordered characters, as Briggs et al. (1992; also Wills et al, 1994) used; it is probably better to avoid a priori judgments of character polarity when dealing with problematic organisms far back in time, especially if morphological evolution was less canalized because of a plethora of "latent recruitable structures" or relaxed genetic regulation (Valentine and Campbell, 1975).
A cladistic approach to problematic fossils avoids both the shoehorning of problematica into extant phyla and the phylogenetic agnosticism of erecting phyla for individual organisms. This approach may also give better resolution of the relationships among extant high-level metazoan clades; fossils are potentially important in phylogenetic reconstruction (reviewed by Donoghue et al., 1989; Smith, 1994). When rates of evolution are high or the time spans involved are long, the inclusion of even fragmentary fossils will improve cladogram resolution (Huelsenbeck, 1991). Metazoan phyla fulfil both of these criteria: they arose in a rapid burst of evolution and have been separated for at least 540 million years. If the radiation of a clade generates high homoplasy, then errors in phylogenetic analyses of extant members of the clade will result. Inclusion of fossil taxa that bracket the radiation may be the only way to minimize this source of error. There is therefore no reason not to use fossils, even problematic ones, in phylogenetic analyses.
A number of attempts have recently been made to apply cladistic methods to the systematics of weird wonders (Beall, 1991; Schram, 1991; Budd, 1993; Conway Morris and Peel, 1995; Hou and Bergstrom, 1995; Monje-Najera, 1995). A recent treatment of the Vendian biota (Buss and Seilacher, 1994) included cladistic terminology but lumped the Vendian biota into one terminal taxon and also relied on characters that are not preserved in fossils. The morphology of many of the Vendian organisms is so simple that getting enough characters is a problem, and many of the characters that such fossils do have are arguably plesiomorphies or convergences, if not taphonomic artifacts. In the case of the Vendian "medusoids," for instance, many of the characters needed for a meaningful comparison with living organisms are simply not seen in fossils. Cladistic analysis of the majority of Vendian organisms is therefore not feasible.
One set of Vendian organisms, however, shows sufficient morphological complexity for a meaningful comparison with Phan-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  194 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
erozoic organisms, i.e., the proarticulates or protoarthropods, which are cephalized, seriated, bilaterally symmetrical organisms that have classically been considered arthropod relatives (Glaessner, 1984; Fedonkin, 1985a, 1985b). There is also a growing number of morphological analyses of Recent and fossil arthropods and related taxa (Bergstrom, 1992; Briggs and Fortey, 1992; Briggs et al, 1992; Eernisse et al., 1992; Wheeler et al., 1993; Wills et al., 1994; Hou and Bergstrom, 1995; Monje-Najera, 1995) and molecular analyses of extant arthropods (Lake, 1990; Erwin, 1991; Turbeville et al., 1991; Ballard et al., 1992; Winnepenninckx et al., 1992; Wheeler et al., 1993). Although there is hardly a consensus on arthropod phylogeny, this database at least provides a framework within which to compare analyses that include Vendian taxa.
PROCEDURE
Selection of Taxa
Marrella, Canadaspis, Olenoides, Agnostus, Naraoia, Sanctacaris, Burgessia, Yohoia, Leanchoilia, Skara, and Sidneyia, and the problematic Anomalocaris, Peytoia, Opabinia, Nectocaris, Facivermis, and Kerygmachela. (Discoveries of complete anomalocarid fos-
sils in China have made revision of the genus Anomalocaris necessary: former Anomalocaris nathorsti, the most common and best known Burgess Shale anomalocarid, has since been placed in the revived genus Peytoia [Chen et al., 1994], which should be kept in mind when referring to earlier literature on Anomalocaris. In this paper, the term "anomalocarid" refers to material for which the genus is not obvious or not specified.) I also included an unnamed Burgess Shale problematicum reconstructed by Delle Cave and Simonetta (1991: fig. 32C). I have drawn on their reconstruction for now (Fig. Id), although no formal description has yet appeared. They dubbed the fossil "Collins's monster" after its discoverer; this form is referred to here as the C-monster, pending its formal description.
The V endian taxa selected for
analysis were Praecambridium, Parvancorinaw, ere included: the Devonian pycnogonid Vendia, Mialsemia, Bomakellia, Spriggina, anPdalaeoisopus, the Carboniferous monuran Marywadea. Praecambridium, Parvancorina,Dasyleptus, and the two Devonian problemand Spriggina are known from several
specimens from the Ediacara Hills of south
Australia and rare specimens from the
White Sea coast of the northeastern Rus-
sian platform. Marywadea is currently
known only from Ediacara, and Vendia, BoEchiniscoides, the eutardigrades Milnesium makellia, and Mialsemia are known from and Macrobiotus, the onychophoran Peripa-
single specimens from the White Sea coast.
I scored most of these forms from literature descriptions (see Appendix 1) but had the opportunity to examine the holotypes of Bomakellia, Mialsemia, and Vendia and original material of Parvancorina and cf. Praecambridium and to score characters directly from them. I also examined casts of Ediacaran specimens of Spriggina and Parvancorina in the collections of the University of California Museum of Paleontology (Figs. la^c).
tus, the pycnogonid Nymphon, and the centipede Lithobius. These taxa were included to increase the range of morphological diversity and to provide exemplars for taxa that are not known as fossils or not represented in the Cambrian. These taxa were scored from descriptions in the literature (Appendix 1).
There is already considerable evidence that the organisms chosen are likely to be related in some way. Delle Cave and Simonetta (1991) argued for relationships among tardigrades, onychophorans, ar-
cladistic
Four post-Cambrian fossil arthropods
Cambrian taxa selected were the ony-
chophoranlike Onychodictyon, Hallucigenia,thropods, and fossil anomalocarids and Xenusion, Microdictyon, Cardiodictyon, Lu"armored lobopods." Bergstrom (1986, olishania, and Aysheaia, the arthropods 1987, 1991) and Chen et al. (1994) sug-
atic arthropods Arthropleura and Cheloniellon. Eleven extant taxa were also scored: the priapulid Priapulus,the kinorhynchs Echinoderes and Semnoderes, the heterotardigrades Neostygarctus, Echiniscus, and
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 195
 FIGURE 1. Reconstructions of some less well-known taxa used in this analysis, (a) Bomakellia (Vendian, Summer Coast, White Sea, Russia), based on Paleontological Institute, Moscow (PIN) holotype 3992/508. Estimated total length, 95 mm; maximum head width, 30 mm. Exact number of segments and reconstruction of terminal four segments is conjectural, (b) Mialsemia (Vendian, Winter Coast, White Sea, Russia), based on PIN holotype 3993/401. Maximum width, 54 mm. Head reconstruction is conjectural (see note to character 22, Appendix 2). (c) Vendia (Vendian, Yarensk borehole, Arkhangelsk region, Russia), based on the PIN holotype (see Fedonkin, 1985b: pi. 21, fig. 1). Total length, 14 mm. (d) Marymadea (Vendian, Ediacara Hills, Australia), based largely on information from Gehling (1991: pi. 4, fig. 1). Total length, 38 mm. (e) "C-monster" (Middle Cambrian, Burgess Shale, British Columbia, Canada) after Delle Cave and Simonetta (1991: fig. 32c).
gested links between the anomalocarids Spriggina to be an early offshoot of the line and Opabinia (see Briggs and Whittington, leading to arthropods, and Gehling (1991)
1987, for a dissenting opinion). Dzik and Krumbiegel (1989), Schram (1991), Conway Morris (1993b), and Chen et al. (1994) placed anomalocarids in or very near the arthropods. Valentine (1989, 1991) and Dzik and Krumbiegel (1989) considered
presented evidence that Spriggina and Praecambridium are arthropod relatives.
Some authors have claimed that lobopod organisms were independently derived from mollusclike coelomate ancestors and are not close to the arthropods (e.g., Hou
   Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  196 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
and Bergstrom, 1995, who used Neopilina [!] features, including ultrastructural features,
as the outgroup to the lobopods). However, analyses based on both molecules and morphology strongly suggest that onychophorans are close to the arthropods, although opinions differ on their position. Schram (1991) and Ballard et al. (1992) suggested that onychophorans are derived with respect to other arthropod classes, a position they retain in Eernisse et al/s (1992) reanalysis of Schram's data. However, Ballard et al/s (1992) 12S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences may not be informative enough for any firm conclusion; at least one onychophoran sequence shows convergence with a chelicerate sequence, and the tree topology is very sensitive to sequence alignment (Wagele and Wetzel, 1994; Wagele and Stanjek, 1995). Lauterbach (1978), Eernisse et al. (1992), and Wheeler et al. (1993) placed onychophorans as sister taxa to the rest of the arthropods, in accordance with a more traditional position.
The aschelminths are a set of pseudocoelomate taxa including the nematodes, gastrotrichs, kinorhynchs, priapulids, rotifers, and others. Some have grouped all these taxa, or most of them, into one phylum (e.g., Hyman, 1951; Bergstrom, 1989; Nielsen, 1995). Others have stated that the aschelminths are polyphyletic (e.g., Remane, 1963; Willmer, 1990; Ruppert, 1991; Eernisse et al., 1992; Conway Morris, 1993a), a position supported by existing molecular data (Raff et al., 1994). Most phylogenetic hypotheses do not place the aschelminths close to the arthropods. However, preliminary results of an 18S rRNA analysis suggest that the aschelminth taxa do not form a monophyletic clade and appeared early in the metazoan radiation among the protostome phyla (Raff et al., 1994); it is therefore possible that some "aschelminth" groups are sister taxa to the arthropods and their allies. Because this hypothesis is not part of orthodox metazoan phylogenetic thought, a brief review of the evidence for it is presented here.
Tardigrades are usually considered to be arthropod or onychophoran relatives (e.g., Lauterbach, 1978; Kinchin, 1994; Monje-Najera, 1995), but a number of "aschelminth"
appear in tardigrades (Dewel et al., 1993; Kinchin, 1994). For example, tardigrades and kinorhynchs both have a ventral ganglia chain with paired connectives, similar sensillae, and tripartite division of the brain (Nielsen, 1995), and the cuticular "pillars" of heterotardigrades are also found in nematodes (Malakhov, 1994). Ruppert (1991) and Kristensen and Higgins (1991) listed a number of features that may link kinorhynchs and arthropods. One priapulid (Meiopriapulus fijiensis) has a system of intraepidermal channels floored by the body wall muscle layer; Storch et al. (1989:330) stated that "a comparable system has not been described from any invertebrate, therefore making interpretation difficult." However, very similar channels are present in living onychophorans (Robison, 1985: fig. 1) and probably existed in fossil lobopods (Robison, 1985; Budd, 1993). Both arthropods and nematodes control the molt cycle with ecdysteroids (Willmer, 1990); onychophorans may also use ecdysteroids, although this use has not been confirmed (Nielsen, 1995).
Several paleontologists have reached similar conclusions regarding an arthropodaschelminth relationship. Dzik and Krumbiegel (1989) and Dzik (1991, 1993) noted similarities between the fossil lobopod Xenusion and the aschelminths and proposed a priapulidlike ancestor for all lobopods, arthropods, and related forms (the details of this hypothesis are examined more critically in Appendix 2). Bergstrom (1989, 1991) also proposed links among Anomalocaris, Opabinia, tardigrades, and aschelminths, although he suggested that anomalocarids and tardigrades arose from separate arthropodization events among the aschelminths. In support of these hypotheses, Eernisse et al. (1992) proposed that onychophorans, tardigrades, kinorhynchs, and nematodes are sister taxa to the arthropods in descending order of proximity, with the whole clade in an unresolved trichotomy with priapulids and with the spiralian protostomes. Therefore, two aschelminth taxa—priapulids and kinorhynchs—were included in the present analysis, using priapulids as the
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 197
outgroup. These taxa are probably closely related to each other (Lang, 1963; Remane, 1963; Willmer, 1990; Nielsen, 1995). Molecular phylogenetic reconstructions of the animal phyla have not yet included either of these taxa; such an analysis would help to test the hypothesis of an aschelminth-arthropod relationship (Raff et al., 1994).
Annelids have long been considered close to arthropods, or at least to uniramian arthropods (reviewed by Willmer, 1990; Nielsen, 1995), and the Vendian form Spriggina has been allied both with annelids and arthropods. However, there is a growing body of evidence that annelids are not close to the arthropods, or at least not their closest relatives (Valentine, 1989, 1991; Delle Cave and Simonetta, 1991; Eernisse et al., 1992; Fryer, 1992; Conway Morris, 1993b; Dzik, 1993; Raff et al., 1994). Schram's (1991) cladistic placement of annelids and pogonophorans as sister taxa to the tardigrade + onychophoran + arthropod clade is at best weakly supported by revisions of his data set (Eernisse et al., 1992; Backeljau et al., 1993; Schram and Ellis, 1994). A different morphological cladistic analysis separates the annelids and arthropods (Eernisse et al., 1992), and new molecular data confirms this separation (Raff et al., 1994; Winnepenninckx et al., 1995; Eernisse, pers. comm.). Therefore, annelids were left out of this analysis.
Dzik and Krumbiegel (1989) and Dzik (1993) proposed relationships between lobopods and Cambrian sclerite-bearing animals such as machaeridians, wiwaxiids, and tommotiids. These animals have usually been compared with either molluscs or annelids (Butterfield, 1990b; Conway Morris and Peel, 1995), but in most cases too little is known about the soft anatomy of these fossils to warrant their inclusion in this analysis. Studies on some exceptionally well-preserved individuals do not obviously suggest a relationship with the lobopods or arthropods (Butterfield, 1990b; Conway Morris and Peel, 1995).
Character Analysis and Scoring
Characters were described, as far as possible, in neutral language; as Beall (1991)
pointed out, this is necessary to avoid preconceived notions of homology from influencing character scoring. All characters were unordered (Fitch parsimony). Analyses were carried out using the ACCTRAN option of P AUP 3.1.1 (Swofford, 1993).
Coding inapplicable characters as missing can lead to impossible ancestral states and unjustified trees (Platnick et al., 1991; Maddison and Maddison, 1992); it is also tantamount to discarding data because characters are coded as if nothing about their state were known, when in fact there is information about their state. However, use of "not applicable" as a separate character state has the effect of decreasing character independence and weighting certain characters very strongly; two taxa that lack a complex structure might be falsely grouped by sharing a large number of "not applicable" character states. This may not be a serious problem in this analysis, because the outgroup, Priapulus, has by far the greatest number of not applicable states, which are thus generally made plesiomorphic. In some cases, this problem was avoided simply by coding a morphological feature as one character, absent/present/ present with modification, rather than as two characters, absent/present and not applicable / simple / modification. However, the question of how to score inapplicable character states remains a very real problem for this analysis, one for which there is no definitive answer. To examine the effect of both scoring conventions, I analyzed two versions of the data matrix. In the first version (Appendix 3), when a given character described something that was not applicable to a taxon, the nonapplicable character state was scored as 0. Characters were only scored as missing (?) if their state could not be determined from the available material. In the second version (Appendix 4), inapplicable characters were scored as missing, following previous cladistic hypotheses of Cambrian arthropod phylogeny (Briggs and Fortey, 1992; Briggs et al., 1992; Wills et al., 1994).
Two exceptions were made to these scoring conventions. The monuran Dasyleptus lacked paired caudal cirri, and the tardi-
   Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  198 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45 grade Echiniscus lacks paired sternites. Both lia and Mialsemia) are definitely bilateral.
of these characters were scored as missing for these taxa because several close relatives of these genera are known to have these features (Carpenter, 1992; Kinchin, 1994). These genera might not be the most representative exemplars of their clades, but they are much better known morphologically than are their relatives.
Hennig's Auxiliary Principle states that convergence should never be assumed; one should always assume homology in the absence of contrary evidence. Ideally, homology has three components: morphological and positional similarity, descent from a common ancestor, and similarity in developmental pathways or developmental constraints (Hall, 1992). Not all of these components are congruent or equally applicable when actually determining homology (Hall, 1992), and the second cannot be used a priori because it is what the cladistic analysis is set up to test. Some developmental information can be obtained from fossils when there are growth series, but for most of the fossil taxa included here there is little or no developmental information (but see Jacobs, 1992); the developmental genetics of living kinorhynchs and tardigrades are also poorly known. Thus, position and gross morphological similarity were used as criteria for evaluating homology. A number of characters whose homology could only be confirmed by careful developmental study and/or much more fossil material, such as precise tagmosis patterns, were also left out (for more extensive character analysis, see Appendix 2).
One character that could have been used but was not was bilateral versus glide reflectional symmetry of the body. Previous hypotheses of the relationships of Vendian organisms have attached great importance to this character. In glide reflectional symmetry, right and left halves of an organism are mirror images but are displaced with respect to each other along the plane of symmetry; there may or may not be unequal numbers of seriated structures on either side. This symmetry is said to be characteristic of Vendian organisms, although some Vendian fossils (e.g., Bomakel-
Some authors have claimed that this feature rules out an arthropod affinity, or for that matter a metazoan affinity, for the Vendian fossils (e.g., Bergstrom, 1991). However, glide reflectional symmetry can also result from distortion or shrinkage (Gehling, 1991; Jenkins, 1992). Despite Bergstrom's claim that "the alternation of 'segments' of the two sides cannot have so arisen" (Bergstrom, 1991:27), anomalocarids from Utah (Robison, 1991: fig. 10.3) and the Burgess Shale (Whittington and Briggs, 1985: pi. 10, figs. 44, 45, 47), some Burgess Shale polychaetes (Gehling, 1991), and a possible polychaete from the Devonian Hunsriick Slate of western Germany (Sturmer et al., 1980: pi. 17, fig. 37) all appear to show glide reflection symmetry, sometimes with unequal numbers of appendages on either side, if interpreted literally. Even if glide reflectional symmetry were truly present in Vendian organisms, it would not necessarily separate them from the bilaterian metazoa. Aside from many colonial and sessile metazoans, nudibranchs such as Tethys, Melibe, and Tritonia (Hyman, 1967: figs. 163G, 215B; Beklemishev, 1969: fig. 97E), the tapeworm Tatria (Beklemishev, 1969: fig. 93G), a few pelagic polychaetes such as Travisiopsis (Fauchald, 1977: fig. 27B), and cephalochordates and agnathans (Simonetta and Insom, 1993: figs. 6A, 6B) all show glide reflectional symmetry, or a variant of it, in a major aspect of gross anatomy. Peripatus may show unequal numbers of appendages on the two sides of the body as a rare variant (Lavallard and Campiglia, 1973). Among fossils, certain palaeoscolecidans (e.g., Brock and Cooper, 1993: figs. 9-5, 9-8, 9-12) and machaeridians (e.g., Dzik, 1993: figs. 8C, 8E) show glide reflection symmetry in the sclerotome, yet there is no serious doubt that these creatures are metazoans; palaeoscolecidans may be close relatives of the "aschelminth" priapulids or nematomorphs (Conway Morris, 1993b; Dzik, 1993; Hou and Bergstrom, 1994). True glide reflectional symmetry probably appeared more than once among the metazoans, in various structures and organ systems.
Other characters that supposedly sepa-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 199
rate the Vendian fossils from the metazoans are probably not synapomorphies and have no phylogenetic meaning (see Gehling [1991] and Waggoner [1995] for more complete critiques). Seilacher (1989) made the supposed "quilted pneu" morphology of the Vendian fossils the cornerstone of his argument for excluding them from the Metazoa. If a quilted pneu is defined as a fluid-filled sac divided by partitions, then any organism with extensive internal fluidfilled spaces can be considered "quilted": archaeocyathids and sponges, some anthozoans, chondrophorines, annelids, ammonoids and nautiloids, many echinoids, large foraminiferans, and some algae. Furthermore, on a number of Vendian fossils, such as Vendia, Parvancorina, and Mialsemia, it takes imagination to see anything like Seilacher's "fractal and serial quilting." Seilacher's statement that the "vendobiontans" lacked a mouth is contradicted by the presence of branching structures in the anterior end of Marywadea and Praecambridium; it is difficult to see these as anything other than digestive caecae similar to those found in a number of arthropods (Gehling, 1991). Seilacher (1989) and Bergstrom (1991) suggested that the arthropodlike Vendian fossils are sessile frondlike organisms in which the "head" is actually the holdfast. However, at least at the Vendian localities on the Winter Coast of the White Sea in Russia, holdfasts of frondlike organisms are often preserved on different bedding planes from their fronds (pers. obs. 1993). I have never seen Spriggina, Vendia,Parvancorina, or any such forms "head in the sand," and I know of no reports of this in the literature or from colleagues.
Search Procedures and Tests of Robustness
tree was attained, characters were reweighted according to the maximum value of the rescaled consistency index (RCI = consistency index [CI] X retention index [RI]), and the most-parsimonious trees were sought again; this procedure was repeated until tree topology did not change. Tree stability was tested with a measure variously called Bremer support, decay analysis, and length difference (Bremer, 1994). A clade was considered supported if it was found in the strict consensus tree of all trees one step longer than the most-parsimonious trees, all trees two steps longer, and so on, to the limits of available computer memory. These values were used to calculate the total support index as outlined by Bremer (1994). The consistency of this data set with previously proposed hypotheses of arthropod relationships was examined by moving branches of the most-parsimonious trees to new nodes and then searching above and below the nodes for more parsimonious solutions, using MacClade 3.01 (Maddison and Maddison, 1992).
RESULTS
"Not Applicable" Character State
Scored as a separate state.—When inapplicable characters were scored with their own "not applicable" states, two most-parsimonious trees were obtained (Fig. 2), with a length of 515, a CI of 0.324, and an RI of 0.630. Successive reweighting by the best value of the RCI and repeating the search generated nine most-parsimonious trees (Fig. 3) with a CI of 0.416 and an RI of 0.721. The topology of these trees was close to that of the original most-parsimonious trees, but some differences were noted, such as paraphyly of the lobopods. Further reweightings produced the same nine trees.
Bremer support analysis yielded 147 trees of length 516 and 4,279 trees of length 517. Searches for trees of length 518 exhausted available computer memory before terminating. To compensate, the search for trees 518 steps long was repeated three
The data matrix was analyzed using
PAUP 3.1.1 (Swofford, 1993). This matrix is
much too large for practical analysis by ex-
haustive or branch-and-bound search algo-
rithms. Twenty replicates of random addi-
tion heuristic searches, using the "steepest
descent" option in PAUP 3.1.1, were used
to find the most-parsimonious trees. Priaptimes, using a different random addition ulus was used as the outgroup. sequence each time, and sets of 7,010, 7,509,
To test tree robustness, when a consensus and 7,136 trees were recovered. Sets of
   Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  200
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
VOL. 45
FIGURE 2.
applicable" (length = 515, CI = 0.324, RI = 0.630). Numbers above each branch represent Bremer support index (i.e., the number of additional steps needed to collapse each node to a polytomy).
One of the two most-parsimonious trees for which inapplicable characters were scored as "not
6,351, 6,427, 6,524, and 6,630 trees 519 steps long were recovered. Only those clades that were supported each time were accepted as being supported at this level. The Bremer support index for the entire tree was 0.157.
Scored as missing.—When inapplicable characters were coded as missing, four most-parsimonious trees were obtained, with a length of 357, a CI of 0.334, and an RI of 0.610 (Fig. 4). Successive reweighting
Priapulus Echinoderes Semnoderes Kerygmachela
Macrobiotus Milnesium Echiniscoides Echiniscus Neostygarctus Peripatus
Aysheaia
"C-monster"
Luolishania Xenusion Onychodictyon Microdictyon Hallucigenia Cardiodictyon Facivermis Nectocaris Spriggina Marywadea Mialsemia Parvancorina Praecambridium
Vendia Dasyleptus Palaeoisopus Nymphon Bomakellia Anomalocaris Peytoia Opabinia
Arthropleura Lithobius Marrella Canadaspis Skara Burgessia Leanchoilia Naraoia Olenoides
Agnostus Cheloniellon Sidneyia Sanctacaris Yohoia
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996
WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA
201
FIGURE 3. 0.721).
Priapulus Echinoderes Semnoderes Macrobiotus Milnesium Echiniscoides Echiniscus Neostygarctus Peripatus Facivermis "C-monster" Luolishania
Xenusion Aysheaia Onychqdictyon Microdictyon Hallucigenia Cardiodictyon Kerygmachela Spriggina Marywadea Nectocans Mialsemia
Vendia Praecambridium Parvancorina Arthropleura Lithobius Dasyleptus Palaeoisopus Nymphon Bomakellia
Anomalocaris Peytoia Opabinia Marrella Canadaspis Skara Burgessia Leanchoilia Naraoia Olenoides
Agnostus Cheloniellon Sidneyia Sanctacaris Yohoia
Strict consensus of nine most-parsimonious trees found after first reweighting (CI = 0.416, RI =
of the matrix by the maximum RCI yielded three most-parsimonious trees, whose topology was unaffected by repeated reweightings. The strict consensus of these trees (Fig. 5) shows some congruence with other searches (e.gv euarthropod monophy-
ly, grouping of trilobitomorphs and "arachnomorph" arthropods) and some taxon placements that are perhaps more "orthodox" than the results of other searches (e.gv Dasyleptus g r o u p e d w i t h Lithobius, Peripatus close to the ancestry of euarthropods) but
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 202
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
VOL. 45
FIGURE 4.
ing" (length = 357, CI = 0.334, RI = 0.610). Numbers above each branch represent Bremer support index.
One of the four most-parsimonious trees for which inapplicable characters were scored as "miss-
show tardigrade polyphyly, an unusual grouping of heterotardigrades and Vendian forms, and paraphyly of the lobopods. Some of these conclusions are hard to substantiate from more detailed analysis of extant taxa. Two successive reweightings gave
three most-parsimonious trees, which were unchanged in further reweightings. Unlike the first analysis, the topology of the reweighted trees was quite different from that of the original tree (Fig. 6).
As in the first analysis, memory limita-
Priapulus Macrobiotus Milnesium Aysheaia Luolishania Xenusion Onychodictyon Microdictyon Hallucigenia Cardiodictyon Peripatus Facivermis Palaeoisopus Nymphon Arthropleura Dasyleptus Lithobius Marrella Leanchoilia Canadaspis Skara Cheloniellon Sidneyia Sanctacaris Yohoia Burgessia Naraoia Olenoides Agnostus Spriggina Marywadea Bomakellia Mialsemia Parvancorina Praecambridium Vendia "C-monster" Nectocaris Echiniscoides Echiniscus Neostygarctus Opabmia Peytoia Anomalocaris Kerygmachela Echinoderes Semnoderes
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 203
Priapulus Macrobiotus Milnesium Nectocaris Kerygmachela Echinoderes Semnoderes Opabinia Peytoia Anomalocaris Facivermis "C-monster" Luolishania Xenusion Onychodictyon Aysheaia Peripatus Microdictyon Hallucigenia Cardiodictyon Spriggina Marywadea Echiniscoides Echiniscus Neostygarctus Mialsemia Bomakellia Parvancorina Praecjambridium Vendia
Arthropleura Palaeoisopus Nymphon Dasyleptus Lithobius Marrella Leanchoilia Canadaspis Skara Cheloniellon Sidneyia Sanctacaris Yohoia Burgessia Naraoia Olenoides
Agnostus
FIGURE 5. Strict consensus of three most-parsimonious trees found after second reweighting (CI = 0.444, RI = 0.738).
tions prohibited full assessment of Bremer support. There were 749 trees of length 358, one step longer than the most-parsimonious trees. Repeated searches with different random addition sequences each time found sets of 7,256, 7,439, and 7,451 trees
of length 359, sets of 6,925, 7,145, and 7,191 trees of length 360, and sets of 6,046, 6,545, 6,832, and 7,165 trees of length 361. The Bremer support index for the entire tree was 0.157.
Comparison of scoring conventions.—Several
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  204
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
VOL. 45
1 1 1
4
1
I 5
•>
1 1
8
-H— •
6
1
1 1
3 I
"aschelminths"
Onychophora
Xenusia
Tardigrada
Sprigginidae
Vendiamorpha
Anomalopoda
Pycnogonida
"atelocerates"
Crustaceanomorpha
Trilobitomorpha
Cheliceramorpha
1 2
1
1 7
FIGURE 6.
1 = Podophora; 2 = Lobopoda; 3 = Polylobopoda; 4 = Cephalata; 5 = Arthropoda; 6 = Euarthropoda; 7 = Schizoramia; 8 = Arachnomorpha.
Graphic description of taxonomic scheme proposed in this paper. Numbers denote named taxa:
clades were supported in both analyses. In
both, the arthropods appear monophyletic
with clades of "crustaceanomorph" and
"arachnomorph" biramous arthropods.
The armored lobopods (Scleronychophora
of Hou and Bergstrom, 1995), the Cambri-
an clade of Sidneyia, Sanctacaris, and Yohoia, the priapulids but were closer to the the trilobites plus Naraoia, the pycnogoanomalocarids. These results run counter
to current understanding of morphology;
although heterotardigrades and eutardiand Vendia are supported by both analygrades differ in many respects, they share
ses.
nids, and the "vendiamorph" clade of
Mialsemia, Parvancorina, Praecambridium,
However, in the second analysis, unusual placements of some taxa were noted. The tardigrades appear polyphyletic, with the eutardigrades near the base of the tree and the heterotardigrades highly derived. The kinorhynchs did not appear close to
so many characters (similar stylet appara-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 205
tus, fixed number of appendages, pharyn-
geal bulb with placoids, etc.) that there
seems to be no reason to doubt tardigrade
monophyly or to group heterotardigrades
with anomalocarids and kinorhynchs
(Dewel et al., 1993; Kinchin, 1994). There is
also abundant morphological and ultra-
structural data to support a close relation-
ship between priapulids and kinorhynchs
(e.g., Kristensen and Higgins, 1991; Nebel-
sick, 1993); therefore, the wide separation
between priapulids and kinorhynchs ren-
ders this analysis suspect. A look at
PAUP's reconstruction of character evolu-
tion for the second matrix shows that some
of these suspect topologies are based on
character reconstructions that contradict
each other. For example, PAUP internally
reconstructed the kinorhynchs as having
had only flaplike appendages with vena-
tion but also with numerous annulations
on lobopods, simple hook-shaped claws,
and a single row of appendage spines. The
alleged synapomorphies for the clade of
taxa. For 47 taxa, CIrandom = 0.0806; I conclude that both data sets are informative.
Sanderson and Donoghue (1989) noted that the CI of a cladogram directly varies with the number of taxa; they empirically
derived the formula CIexpected = 0.90 — 2
0.022n + 0.000213n for this relationship. The expected CI for a tree of 47 taxa is 0.337, very close to the actual CI values of 0.322 and 0.334. There has been debate over whether cladograms of Cambrian organisms are less consistent than cladograms of Recent taxa (e.g., McShea, 1993). In the few analyses that have been done, Cambrian organisms are no more prone to homoplasy than are extant organisms (Willis et al., 1994). At present, this is also true for the few cladograms that include Vendian taxa; CI values for cladograms of Vendian and Cambrian frondlike organisms are also well within the range for cladograms of extant taxa (unpubl.). Simonetta's (1990) hypothesis and Gould's (1989) latent genetic potential hypothesis
Kerygmachela + kinorhynchs include the are not supported; homoplasy does not
loss of reversal of terminal appendages, which cannot be applied to kinorhynchs. The synapomorphies for this clade + anomalopods include flaplike limbs and one pair of cephalic appendages, which again cannot apply to the kinorhynchs.
For these reasons, I have chosen to use the results of the first analysis as the basis for the following discussion of evolution and systematics. However, in some cases the second analysis yielded results that seem more consistent with external evidence (e.g., relationships within the arthropod clade). Neither method of character scoring is completely satisfactory; the first can effectively weight certain characters very heavily, which may be inappropriate or unintended by the investigator, and the second can lead to inaccurate and contradictory character state reconstructions.
Other measures of support.—Klassen et al. (1991) showed that to be phylogenetically informative a data set must exceed the expected CI for a random data set of the
same size, given by the formula CIrandom =
seem more common among Vendian than among Recent taxa. Sanderson and Donoghue (1989) pointed out that unknown character states will tend to increase the CI relative to an analysis in which all characters are known; my analysis clearly showed this effect.
Bremer's total support index (Bremer, 1994) is identical in both analyses. These values are low compared with those given by Bremer (Bremer, 1994), but several clades in each analysis are well supported despite low Bremer support for the entire trees. Because time and memory restrictions kept me from carrying the Bremer analysis to its conclusion (i.e., to the number of extra steps at which the strict consensus tree becomes a complete polytomy), some clades may have higher Bremer support values, and thus the total support indices may be slight underestimates of the true values. This tendency may be counterbalanced by the fact that only subsets of the sets of less parsimonious trees were examined, whose consensus may have supported clades not supported by the full sets of trees.
2.9370 X n
09339
, where n is the number of
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  206 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
Tree Topology and Major Clades
Arthropods and anomalopods.—My analysis did not include as many arthropod taxa as have recent analyses of the arthropods alone (e.g., Wills et al. 1994), but it did include some Devonian and Carboniferous taxa that these previous analyses did not include. A number of potentially important characters for inferring arthropod phytogeny, such as differentiation of specific somites and tagmosis patterns, were also left out of my analysis; scoring such characters for the nonarthropod problematic taxa would have mostly been guesswork. Thus, the phylogenies generated by this analysis may not be comparable with the results of other workers.
In the final cladogram, the living arthropods are in a monophyletic group, in agreement with Lauterbach (1978), Turbeville et al. (1991), Field (in Erwin, 1991: fig. lb), Eernisse et al. (1992), Wheeler et al. (1993), Raff et al. (1994), and Nielsen (1995). There is support for the separation of the uniramian arthropods from the rest of the arthropods (Manton and Anderson, 1979; Willmer, 1990; Anderson, 1993; Budd, 1993) but in an unexpected way: a clade consisting of Precambrian and Cambrian organisms with flaplike appendages, referred to here as anomalopods, comes between some or all uniramous arthropods and the schizoramians. If this placement is correct, the anomalocarids should be placed in the arthropod crown group. However, making the anomalopods the sister taxon of all arthropods, forcing monophyly of the Arthropoda as typically defined, requires only two additional steps. Schram's (1991) placement of Anotn-
the trilobite-crustacean-chelicerate hypothesis). Marrellais the most primitive crustaceanomorph, as proposed by Willis et al. (1994). The trilobites and Naraoia form a single clade within the arachnomorphs, in agreement with Wheeler et al. (1993), Fortey and Theron (1994), and Willis et al. (1994); Bergstrom's (1992) placement of the agnostids close to the crustaceans requires at least 14 additional steps. The other main arachnomorph clade is formed by Sidneyia, Yohoia, and Sanctacaris; Leanchoilia and Burgessia are sister taxa to these two clades, as they are in Wills et al.'s (1994) tree. The Devonian Chebnielbn is also an arachnomorph, as suggested by Bergstrom (1992). The derivation of Yohoia directly from an anomalocarid ancestor (Bousfield, 1995) is not supported; this topology required at least 13 extra steps.
The position of the pycnogonids is curious. Wheeler et al. (1993) presented a combined molecular analysis (18S ribosomal DNA and ubiquitin) that grouped their pycnogonid exemplar with the other chelicerates; however, successive weighting placed the pycnogonid at the base of the arthropods. My results agree with those of other workers and with other lines of evidence in placing the pycnogonids outside the arachnomorphs, in a primitive position (e.g., Hedgpeth, 1955; Dzik and Krumbiegel, 1989; Fahrenbach, 1994). In my analysis, placing the pycnogonids anywhere in the arachnomorph clade required at least 11 additional steps. The grouping of pycnogonids with anomalopods seems unusual and was not supported in the second analysis. However, Sharov (1966) proposed a relationship between pycnogonids and Opabinia, which he united in the Probos-
alocaris as sister taxon to the Crustacea is cifera. Although his reconstruction of Opanot supported. The Vendian Bomakellia is binia was very inaccurate, his hypothesis of
an anomalopod; this results adds the anomalopods to the lineages that cross the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary.
The branching order within the arthropods closely agrees with that of Wills et al. (1994). Uniramous arthropods are primitive with respect to the Schizoramia, which in turn is divided into crustaceanomorph and arachnomorph clades (equivalent to
relationship may have to be reexamined. More recently, Dzik and Krumbiegel (1989) and Dzik (1993) suggested a link between pycnogonids and anomalocarids. Eye arrangement in pycnogonids andOpabinia, radially arranged mouthparts, and possibly raptorial appendages might link anomalopods and pycnogonids; however, fossil pycnogonids are so rare and extant
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
   1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 207
pycnogonids are so strange that this relationship cannot be strongly supported yet. A relationship between pycnogonids and insects (represented by Dasyleptus) seems even more unusual; making Dasy-
leptus the sister taxon of Lithobius (which would be sanctioned by most conventional hypotheses) requires four additional steps. However, in the first analysis, two of the supporting character states are losses (of genal spines and abdominal appendages). The trees based on reweighted characters group all the uniramous arthropods, including the pycnogonids, with the anomalopods but do not resolve their relationships unanimously. In light of suggestions that insects are in fact primitively biramous (e.g.,. Kukalova-Peck, 1991), I tried recoding Dasyleptus as having appendages with a lost exopod, rather than an absent one (character 4). This recoding resulted in reduced overall resolution, but Dasyleptus did not shift from its position as sister taxon to the pycnogonids. The analysis with inapplicable characters scored as missing grouped Dasyleptus with Lithobius, a much more orthodox position.
The phylogenies proposed by Turbeville et al. (1991), Ballard et al. (1992), Winnepenninckx et al. (1992), Wheeler et al. (1993), Averof and Akam (1995), and Bousfield (1995) placed the crustaceans and some or all uniramous arthropods in a monophyletic clade, the Mandibulata. My analysis does not support this arrangement. This group is at best paraphyletic; monophyly of the Mandibulata requires at least six additional steps. Some of these molecular phylogenies, notably those of Ballard et al. (1992), have been criticized by Wagele and Wetzel (1994), who have argued that molecular data alone are insufficient to resolve arthropod relationships. However, the pre-Silurian history of uniramous arthropods (other than anomalocarids) is very poorly known, with only one fossil (the incomplete and poorly known Cambropodus) indicating the presence of uniramous arthropods in the Cambrian (Delle Cave and Simonetta, 1991). My results could be due to inadequate sampling.
Vendian clades.—With the exception of Bomakellia, the Vendian taxa that were included in this cladogram fall into two clades, successive sister taxa to the arthropods + anomalopods. Most of these forms have relatively few tagmata and a shield that extends over the body; this clade is more or less equal to the class Vendiamorpha Fedonkin 1985. Other, less well-known Vendian taxa, such as Pseudouendia, Onega, and Vendomia, probably should also be classified here; all of these forms possess a shield, although in general they are not well enough known for cladistic analysis. Spriggina and Maryzuadea form the next sister taxon, equal to tike Sprigginidae Glaessner 1958; they lack a head shield that extends over the thorax and have more numerous segments. Making the Sprigginidae the sister taxon to the Vendiamorpha, creating one monophyletic Precambrian proarthropod clade, required one extra step. This placement supports the phylogenetic hypothesis of Valentine (1991), in which the arthropods arose from flattened hemocoelic wormlike forms, comparable to sprigginids and vendiamorphs. However, Bousfield's (1995) identification of Spriggina and Praecambridium as antennognath arthropods is not substantiated.
Nectocaris appears to represent a specialized, independent offshoot of the arthropodan stem group; successive reweightings do not alter its position substantially. Facivermis may also belong here, but its position is not well supported; successive reweightings group it with the lobopods.
Lobopoda.—Monophyly of the Lobopoda (Onychophora + Tardigrada + marine armored lobopods) is supported, although successive weighting in the first analysis yielded a paraphyletic Lobopoda. Although Kerygmachela was not interpreted as having had lobopod appendages in this analysis, it still grouped with the lobopods; placing it anywhere in the anomalopods required at least five extra steps. This result calls into question the interpretation by Chen et al. (1994) of Kerygmachela as an anomalopod.
Within this clade, the tardigrades form a monophyletic group. The heterotardigradeeutardigrade dichotomy, with Echiniscoides
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 208 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
as the heterotardigrade closest to the split (Kinchin, 1994), is supported. Placing the tardigrades among the arthropods, as proposed by recent molecular work (C. Ribera, pers. comm. 1994), required at least eight additional steps. Placing them as outgroup to the arthropods and making the Lobopoda paraphyletic, as suggested by MonjeNajera (1995), required at least four extra steps. The recent find of a phosphatized tardigrade in the early Cambrian of Siberia shows that the tardigrade lineage had split off at least by the early Cambrian (Miiller et al, 1995).
Onychophorans have sometimes been considered uniramian arthropods (e.g., Gould, 1989; Willmer, 1990; Schram, 1991). The trees presented here contradict the findings of these authors and of Ballard et al. (1992) but agree with those of Briggs et al. (1992), Wheeler et al. (1993), Wills et al. (1994), and Monje-Najera (1995) in removing the Onychophora from the arthropods. Enforcing Ballard's 12S rRNA-based hypothesis, which includes extant onychophorans within the arthropods and makes the insects the sister taxon to the crustaceans, required 22 additional steps; when all lobopods were moved into the arthropods, 24 additional steps were required. Enforcing Schram's (1991: fig. 7) hypothesis, which placed onychophorans and tardigrades within the arthropods and also proposed a different arthropod branching order, required at least 30 additional steps. Enforcing Budd's (1993: fig. 4) hypothesis, in which the Cambrian lobopods are polyphyletic within the euarthropod lineages, required 33 additional steps. In other phylogenetic hypotheses, in which the onychophorans are the sister taxon to the arthropods whose most primitive members are myriapods (e.g., Budd, 1993), the Uniramia could still persist as a paraphyletic group. In this analysis, however, onychophorans are not the closest sister taxon to arthropods; such a position required at least four additional steps, depending on the combination of lobopod taxa moved. The Uniramia is polyphyletic.
The branching order of the Cambrian marine armored lobopods closely follows
Ramskold's (1992) morphocline and polarizes it: Ramskold's morphocline is Aysheaia-Luolishania-Xenusion-OnychodictyonHalhicigenia, Microdictyon, Cardiodictyon. The relationship between Hallucigenia and Microdictyon is supported by finds of Lower Cambrian fossil sclerites that combine features of both taxa (Bengtson, 1991). My results indicate that Hallucigenia, Microdictyon, and Cardiodictyon form a clade, in agreement with Hou and Bergstrom (1995).
Only one terrestrial onychophoran was used in this analysis, but differences between living onychophorans are slight (the two extant families differ largely in ranges of segment numbers and gonopore position), and there is no reason to suspect that the terrestrial Onychophora are not monophyletic. Peripatus is probably the only exemplar needed to assess the position of the terrestrial onychophorans. If the topology presented here is correct, it would imply that the lineage leading to terrestrial onychophorans branched off very early and that the Cambrian lobopods so far found are not their direct ancestors. This result contradicts the cladogram of Monje-Najera (1995), which placed Aysheaia as the sister taxon to the terrestrial onychophorans. However, Monje-Najera's apomorphies for Aysheaia + extant onychophorans are all losses—of the proboscis, trunk spines, and plates. Making Aysheaia and Peripatus sister taxa required at least two additional steps; enforcing Monje-Najera's topology for the Cambrian lobopods and onychophorans required at least 19 extra steps.
The fossil lobopods do not form a monophyletic clade with the tardigrades, with which they have often been compared; this result supports the hypothesis of Robison (1985) that the marine lobopods and terrestrial onychophorans should be grouped together. However, making the marine armored lobopods the sister taxon to the tardigrades required only one additional step. Because the few fossil terrestrial onychophorans long postdate the Cambrian (Thompson and Jones, 1980; Robison, 1985), direct fossil evidence for the early evolution of the terrestrial onychophorans is lacking; however, further analysis of a wider range
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 209
of tardigrade taxa, including the newly discovered Cambrian tardigrade (Miiller et al., 1995), will stabilize this part of the phylogeny.
DISCUSSION
Symmetry as a Taxonomic Character
ent organisms, and it may be hard to say when it is homologous. Many invertebrate bodies or structures are tetraradially symmetric about the major axis: scyphozoan and hydrozoan cnidarians, ctenophores, various organ systems of platyhelminths (Beklemishev, 1969: fig. 55, 57A, 57B), the body wall muscles of aplacophorans (Hyman, 1967: fig. 9C), and the tentacle crowns of sipunculans (Gibbs and Cutler, 1987). Either tetraradial symmetry has appeared several times or (less likely) it appeared only once, but it is too widely distributed to be of much use in metazoan phylogenetic reconstruction. The proposed origin of legs from tetraradially arranged vesicles on a wormlike ancestor is hard to reconcile with data on arthropod developmental genetics (J. W. Valentine, pers. comm. 1994), and the details of Dzik's (1991, 1993) scenario may not be correct even if his homologies are accurate. Also, the organisms considered in this analysis show other orders of radial symmetry. Adult priapulid scalids are pentaradially arranged (Hyman, 1951), and kinorhynch and tardigrade buccal structures may occur in multiples of three, four, five, or seven (Nebelsick, 1993; Kinchin, 1994). Aysheaia seems to have had six papillae radially arranged around the mouth. The pharyngeal muscles of pycnogonids, kinorhynchs, and tardigrades are triradially arranged, as they are in other aschelminths and in leeches; Willmer (1990) noted that this character is prone to homoplasy, representing simply the most efficient way to pack muscles around a sucking pharynx.
One character that was not included in
the original cladogram can be preserved in
fossils and may be important: tetraradial
symmetry of the integument, mouthparts,
and/or body wall musculature around the
long axis of the gut. The mouthparts of
Anomalocaris and the placids of kinorhynchs
occur in multiples of four (Nebelsick, 1993),
as do the scalids on the introvert of larval
Priapulus (Higgins et al., 1993). The body
wall muscles of nematodes and kino-
rhynchs (Willmer, 1990: figs. 9.1., 9.4, 9.6)
and the aboral "nipples" of palaeo-
scolecidans, which may be priapulid rela-
tives (Dzik and Krumbiegel, 1989; Miiller
and Hinz-Schallreuter, 1993: figs. 3, 11G),
are also tetraradially arranged. The lorica
ridges of some larval priapulids occur in
multiples of four (van der Land and Mar-
revang, 1985; Storch, 1991: fig. 12; Higgins
et al., 1993), and at least one living pri-
apulid has an octoradial foregut (Storch,
1991: fig. 8A). It is possible that tetraradial
symmetry of mouthparts and integument
structures is symplesiomorphic for the lo-
bopods, anomalopods, and their aschel-
minth relatives and ancestors; it would
have been secondarily lost in the arthro-
pods. Dzik and Krumbiegel (1989) suggest-
ed that the lobopods are primitively tetra-
radial, so that both legs and dorsal bosses
developed from tetraradially arranged
spirted vesicles of a palaeoscolecidanlike
worm. In fact, the intermediate they recon-
struct is not unlike the Burgess Shale ar-
chaeopriapulid Louisella (Conway Morris, from weird wonders to missing links, com-
1977: fig. 27), which had two longitudinal rows of spines and papillae (although whether these structures were dorsal or ventral and exactly what they might be homologous with is not obvious).
This possible homology should not be accepted without reservations. Tetraradiality may occur in different structures of differ-
bining aschelminth characters (radially arranged spinose or platelike oral structures) with arthropod characters (jointed appendages). However, whether this state is plesiomorphic for the taxa included here or was derived independently in the anomalocarids is not known, because the mouthparts and gut of the Vendian taxa are not
Nevertheless, the simple presence of any order of radial symmetry of the gut, mouthparts, and musculature about the major axis may be phylogenetically significant. If this were true, the anomalocarids would go
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  210 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
known. Work on development of living organisms with this kind of symmetry would be useful for evaluating whether radial symmetry is homologous, how it may have appeared, and how plastic the degree of radial symmetry may be.
Trace Fossils and the Evolution of Organism Size
One objection to placing Vendian body fossils with the metazoan bilaterians is the lack of any trace fossils that correspond to known body fossil taxa. However, anomalopods may have spent much of their time swimming, as has been inferred for Anomalocaris, and the only traces they would normally leave would be resting traces. Vendichnus vendicus, from the Summer Coast of the White Sea, may represent such a trace (Fedonkin, 1985c: pi. 19, fig. 10); it has also been interpreted as the resting mark of a nektonic arthropod. Many Vendian bilateral metazoa may have made small and nondescript trace fossils: for instance, collections of round fecal pellets are common in the Vendian (Fedonkin, 1985c; pers. obs. 1993) and could have been made by known Vendian bilaterians. Scratch marks attributable to arthropodlike organisms have been found in Australia (Gehling, 1991: pi. 6, fig. 3) and possibly in north Russia (pers. obs.).
hard to test because there are very few unquestionable meiofaunal-size body fossils of Precambrian and Cambrian animals (but see Miiller et al., 1995). However, a few Precambrian microfossils, fecal pellets, and bioturbation structures tentatively suggest that the earliest metazoans, perhaps including the ancestors of the arthropods and their kin, were meiofaunal (reviewed by Fedonkin, 1992; Conway Morris, 1993b). This hypothesis needs much more documentation and testing.
SYSTEMA TICS
If the Onychophora and Tardigrada are to be included in the Arthropoda, as some systematists have proposed, then all of the taxa examined here, except for the kinorhynchs and priapulids, should be considered arthropods. This arrangement would involve a rather drastic redefinition of the concept of the Arthropoda. However, if the name Arthropoda is restricted to roughly its traditional sense, several high-level clades outside of the Arthropoda can be named. These clades could be designated superphyla, phyla, or subphyla within the Linnean system. However, the use of unranked names (de Queiroz and Gauthier, 1992) probably is the best way to work with the phylogeny of weird wonders and high-level clades. Smith (1994) argued for the retention of Linnean rank for ease of communication among systematists. However, the use of unranked high-level taxa is already routine in discussions of metazoan systematics; Eumetazoa, Bilateria, Deuterostomia, Protostomia, Articulata, Spiralia, Eutrochozoa, Lophophorata, and others are in common use.
However, more distant ancestors of the
arthropods may have been meiofauna that
left no identifiable traces at all (Conway
Morris, 1993a). Dzik (1991, 1993) derived
arthropods (and most other metazoan phy-
la) from priapulid ancestors, stating that
"transitions between phyla took place at
the level of relatively large, hydraulically
propelled animals" (Dzik, 1991:54). How-
ever, over half of all living priapulid spe-
cies, which show most of the morphological
diversity in the taxon, are meiofaunal and
nearly microscopic (van der Land and Nor-
revang, 1985), as are all kinorhynchs and
tardigrades. If size is phylogenetically
meaningful, then the cladogram presented
here supports a hypothesis opposite to
Dzik's (1991, 1993) scenario: ancestors are
likely to have been small, with large size
the derived state, probably attained several
times independently. This hypothesis is in many forms is enlarged and broad.
I propose the name Podophora ("leg bearers") for all organisms included in this analysis, except the kinorhynchs and priapulids, and all of their living and fossil relatives. My classification of the Podophora is outlined in Figure 6, and brief diagnoses are given below (t = extinct clade).
I. Cephalata nom. nov. (Vendian-Recent) typically have a seriated body, narrow appendages, and a definite head area, which
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 211
They share plesiomorphies (chitinous multilayered cuticle, molting controlled by ecdysteroids, etc.) with various "aschelminth" taxa.
A. Arthropoda Siebold and Stannius 1848 (Vendian-Recent) is the crown clade of the Cephalata. It includes euarthropods and anomalopods.
1. Euarthropoda Lauterbach 1978 (?Vendian, Cambrian-Recent) includes those organisms classically considered true arthropods, i.e., trilobites, chelicerates, crustaceans, etc., with jointed limbs and segmented cuticle. This clade appears in the early Cambrian, but some Venetian fossils (scratch marks and "soft-bodied trilobites") may also represent euarthropods or their stem lineage. The arthropods with uniramous appendages, excluding the pycnogonids, were paraphyletic in every analysis. Remaining arthropods form a monophyletic Schizoramia, which is split into the Crustaceanomorpha (crustaceans and various Cambrian taxa) and the Arachnomorpha (trilobites, chelicerates, and various Cambrian taxa). However, other analyses have supported monophyly of the crustaceans + atelocerates in a clade often called the Mandibulata; more work is needed to resolve atelocerate relationships.
2. tAnomalopoda nom. nov. (Vendian-Cambrian) includes the Cambrian Anomalocaris, Peytoia, and Opabinia and the Vendian form Bomakellia and all of their relatives. Anomalopods have laterally extending flaplike appendages with venation or folding, and those whose mouthparts are known had radially arranged plates surrounding the mouth and enlarged uniramous raptorial appendages. Cambrian anomalopods are inferred to have been nektonic predators. In the absence of preserved mouthparts in the only Vendian anomalopod, it is not known whether Vendian anomalopods were predators or whether they occupied some other trophic niche; their identification as predators would contradict the Garden of Ediacara hypothesis of the Vendian as an idyllic time without predation (McMenamin, 1986; McMenamin and McMenamin, 1990). The possible relationship between the pyc-
nogonids and the anomalopods should be examined further. Pycnogonida is retained as a separate clade for the present.
B. The stem group of the Cephalata includes the clades tVendiamorpha and tSprigginida.
1. tVendiamorpha Fedonkin 1985 (Vendian, ?Cambrian) includes Praecambridium, Parvancorina, and Vendia. The Vendian taxa Onega, Vendomia, and Pseudovendia probably also belong here. This clade is not known to have survived into the Phanerozoic. Simonetta and Insom (1993) discussed Skania as a possible survivor from the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale. Skania, however, is very close to the fossils described as Naraoia protaspides (Hou et al., 1991) and thus may be a true arthropod.
2. tSprigginidae Glaessner 1958 (Vendian, ?Cambrian) includes the two genera Spriggina and Maryzvadea. Simonetta and Insom (1993) described Metaspriggina, a possible Cambrian survivor in this clade. Metaspriggina is not well preserved, but it may be an early chordate, based on the position of what may be the digestive tract and anus (Briggs et al., 1994).
3. fNectocaris Conway Morris 1976 (Cambrian) appears to represent another stem lineage of the Cephalata, but its morphology is still not well understood. Perhaps the hypothesis that Nectocaris is a chordate (Simonetta, 1988) should be reexamined; until more fossils are found, it will be difficult to place Nectocaris definitively. fFacivermis (Cambrian) may also be a stem cephalate, but successive reweightings group it with the Lobopoda. It remains incertae sedis.
n. Lobopoda Snodgrass 1938 (CambrianRecent), the sister taxon to the Cephalata, includes forms with clawed lobopod appendages. It contains two main crown clades.
A. Tardigrada Spallanzani 1777 (Cambrian-Recent) is retained in its usual sense: microscopic organisms with four pairs of clawed lobopods, paired piercing stylets, no mouthparts derived from appendages, capacity for anhydrobiosis in many (but not all) species, etc. My analysis
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  212 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
substantiates the traditional division of the Tardigrada into Heterotardigrada and Eutardigrada.
B. Polylobopoda nom. nov. are larger than the tardigrades, have more than four pairs of appendages, and completely lack anhydrobiosis as far as is known.
1. tXenusia Dzik and Krumbiegel 1989 (Cambrian) includes marine polylobopods with more or less unspecialized appendages serving as mouthparts. There are several competing hypotheses of relationships within the Xenusia (see Hou and Bergstrom, 1995; Monje-Najera, 1995), and I am not yet formally proposing any cladistically defined taxa within the Xenusia. However, my results strongly support the monophyly of Cardiodictyon, Hallucigenia, and Microdictyon, which were placed by Hou and Bergstrom (1995) in the tScleronychophora.
2. Onychophora Grube 1853 (Pennsylvanian-Recent) is retained to include all terrestrial polylobopods. Apomorphies for this group include antennae, paired mouth papillae associated with slime glands, and paired jaws derived from the third appendages.
C. Kerygmachela Budd 1993 appears as the stem group to the Lobopoda. However, the position of this fossil form is not stable, and the position may depend on the scoring convention used in the analysis.
CONCLUSIONS
1. Arthropoda is a monophyletic crown clade; the branching order obtained here is congruent with that of several previous analyses based on morphology and on molecules. Onychophorans, however, are neither arthropods nor their closest sister taxon, and the old grouping of onychophorans and atelocerate arthropods is not supported.
lated to the Vendian Bomakellia. If anomalopods are included in the Arthropoda, as proposed in this paper, then the stratigraphic range of the Arthropoda may be extended into the Precambrian. The Anomalopoda should be included in future analyses of arthropod phylogeny.
3. The cladistic analysis presented here implies that the main podophoran lineages were differentiated by the middle Vendian, a hypothesis that receives some support from Vendian trace fossils. It also questions the Garden of Ediacara hypothesis by suggesting that the Vendian Bomakellia is a member of a clade whose Cambrian representatives were formidable predators.
4. There seems to be no compelling reason to consider the sprigginids and vendiamorphs as unrelated to the main lines of the evolution of metazoan bilaterians.
5. A hypothesized relationship between arthropods and certain "aschelminths" seems to help in interpreting certain features of problematic fossil and living arthropods; this hypothesis merits further study.
6. Problems for future research indicated by this analysis include the relationships of the pycnogonids, interrelationships of the lobopods (in particular monophyly of the Tardigrada), and possible arthropod-aschelminth connections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank M. A. Fedonkin of the Paleontological Institute, Moscow, for his hospitality, ideas, and inspiration and for generously making specimens and literature available to me during my 1993 and 1994 stays at the Institute. I also thank D. Lindberg, J. W. Valentine, G. Lee, C. Meyer, D. Cannatella, D. Faith, and an anonymous reviewer for constructive comments on this paper. I presented an earlier version of these results at the 1994 Willi Hennig Society meeting; I thank all participants who gave me helpful critiques, notably W. Wheeler and H. Ruhberg. Fieldwork and collections research in Russia in 1993 were funded by the Graduate Division of the University of California at Berkeley and by the volunteers of the University of California's University Research Expeditions Program. Additional work in Russia in 1994 was funded by NSF grant EAR-9317247 to J. H. Lipps and J. W. Valentine.
2.
Anomalocaris, Peytoia, a n d Opabinia, though wondrous indeed, are not as "weird" as they have been given credit for being. They share synapomorphies with the rest of the Podophora and can be placed in the clade Anomalopoda within the Arthropoda. Anomalopods are true Ediacaran survivors, closely re-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  216 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
thropods of the Burgess Shale (Middle Cambrian).
Palaeontogr. Ital. 66:35--45.
SIMONETTA, A. M. 1988. Is Nectocaris pteryx a chordate?
BoU. Zool. 55:63-68.
SIMONETTA, A. M. 1990. On the significance of eco-
tones in evolution and on the significance of morphological differences in primitive taxa: Reflections and hypotheses. Boll. Zool. 57:325-330.
SIMONETTA, A. M., AND E. INSOM. 1993. New animals from the Burgess Shale (Middle Cambrian) and their possible significance for understanding of the Bilateria. Boll. Zool. 60:97-107.
logeny inferred from partial 12S rRNA revisited: Monophyly of the Tracheata depends on sequence alignment. J. Zool. Syst. Evol. Res. 33:75-80.
WAGELE, J. W., AND R. WETZEL. 1994. Nucleic arid sequence data are not per se reliable for influence of phytogenies. J. Nat. Hist. 28:749-761.
WAGGONER, B. M. 1995. Ediacaran lichens: A critique Paleobiology 21:393-397.
WAGGONER, B. M., AND A. G. COLLINS. 1995. A new chondrophorine (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa) from the Cadiz Formation (Middle Cambrian) of California. Palaontol. Z. 69:7-16.
SMITH, A. B. 1994. Systematics and the fossil record: WHEELER, W. C , P. CARTWRIGHT, AND C. Y. HAYASHI.
Documenting evolutionary patterns. Blackwell Sci-
entific, London.
SOKOLOV, B. S. 1968. Vendian and Early Cambrian sa-
belliditida (Pogonophora) of the USSR. Proc. IPU Int.
Geol. Congr. 23:79-86.
STORCH, V. 1991. Priapulida. Pages 333-350 in Micro-
scopic anatomy of invertebrates, Volume 4. Aschelminthes (E W. Harrison and E. E. Ruppert, eds.). Wiley-Liss, New York.
STORCH, V , R. P. HIGGINS, AND M. P. MORSE. 1989. i n -
frastructure of the body wall of Meiopriapuhts fijiensis Disparity as an evolutionary index: A comparison of
(Priapulida). Trans. Am. Microsc. Soc. 108:319-331. STURMER, W., E SCHAARSCHMTDT, AND H.-G. MITTMEYER. 1980. Versteinertes Leben im Rontgenlicht. Kleine
Senckenberg-Reihe 11:1-80.
SWOFFORD, D. L. 1993. PAUP: Phylogenetic analysis us-
ing parsimony, version 3.1.1. Illinois Natural History
Survey, Champaign.
TARLO, L. B. H. 1967. Xenusion—Qnychophoran or
coelenterate? Mercian Geol. 2:97-99.
THOMPSON, I., AND D. S. JONES. 1980. A possible ony-
chophoran from the Middle Pennsylvanian Mazon Creek beds of northern Illinois. J. Paleontol. 54:588596.
TURBEVILLE, J. M., D. M. PFEIFER, K. G. FIELD, AND R. A. RAFF. 1991. The phylogenetic status of arthropods, as inferred from 18S rRNA sequences. Mol. Biol. Evol. 8:669-686.
VALENTINE, J. W. 1973. Coelomate superphyla. Syst. Zool. 22:97-102.
VALENTINE, J. W. 1989. Bilaterians of the PrecambrianCambrian transition and the annelid-arthropod relationship. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sri. USA 86:2272-2275.
VALENTINE, J. W. 1991. The sequence of body plans and locomotory systems during the PrecambrianCambrian transition. Pages 389-397 in Constructional morphology and evolution (N. Schmidt-Kittle and K. Vogel, eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
VALENTINE, J. W. 1994 Late Precambrian bilaterians: Grades and clades. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sri. USA 91: 6751-6757.
VALENTINE, J. W., AND C. A. CAMPBELL. 1975. Genetic regulation and the fossil record. Am. Sri. 63:673-680. VAN DER LAND, J., AND A. NORREVANG. 1985. Affinities and intraphyletic relationships of the Priapulida.
Pages 261-273 in The origins and relationships of lower invertebrates (S. Conway Morris, J. D. George, R. Gibson, and H. M. Platt, eds.). Syst. Assoc. Spec. Vol. 28. Clarendon Press, Oxford, England.
WAGELE, J. W., AND G. STANJEK. 1995. Arthropod phy-
multicellulars? 190:299-314.
Neues
Jahrb. Geol.
Palaontol. Abh.
1993. Arthropod phylogeny: A combined approach.
Cladistics 9:1-39.
WHTTTINGTON, H. B., AND D. E. G. BRIGGS. 1985. The
largest Cambrian animal, Anomalocaris, Burgess Shale, British Columbia. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sri. 309:569-609.
WILLMER, P. 1990. Invertebrate relationships: Patterns in animal evolution. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, England.
Cambrian and Recent arthropods. Paleobiology 20:
93-130.
WlNNEPENNDMCKX, B., T. BACKELJAU, AND R. DE WACH-
TER. 1995. Phylogeny of protostome worms derived from 18S rRNA sequences. Mol. Biol. Evol. 12:641649.
WlNNEPENNINCKX, B., T. BACKELJAU, Y. VAN DE PEER, AND R. DE WACHTER. 1992. Structure of the small ribosomal subunit RNA of the pulmonate snail, Limicolaria kambeul, and phylogenetic analysis of the Metazoa. FEBS Lett. 309:123-126.
YocHELSON, E. L. 1991. Problematica/incertae sedis. Pages 287-296 in The early evolution of Metazoa and the significance of problematic taxa (A. M. Simonetta and S. Conway Morris, eds.). Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, England.
ZHURAVLEV, A. Y. 1993. Were Ediacaran Vendobionta
WILLS, M. A., D. E. G. BRIGGS, AND R. A. FORTEY. 1994.
Received 5 October 1994; accepted 6 January 1996 Associate Editor: Daniel Faith
APPENDIX 1
SOURCES FOR TAXONOMIC DESCRIPTIONS,
CHARACTER CODING, AND CHARACTER ANAL YSIS
BERGSTROM, J., W. STORMER, AND G. WINTER. 1980. Palaeoisopus, Palaeopantopus and Palaeothea, pycnogonid arthropods from the Lower Devonian Hunsruck Slate, West Germany. Palaontol. Z. 54:7-54.
BRIGGS, D. E. G. 1978. The morphology, mode of life, and affinities of Canadaspis perfecta (Crustacea: Phyllocarida), Middle Cambrian, Burgess Shale, British Columbia. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sri. 281:439-487.
BRIGGS, D. E. G., AND D. COLLINS. 1988. A Middle Cambrian chelicerate from Mount Stephen, British Columbia. Palaeontology 31:779-798.
 Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 217
BRUTON, D. L., AND H. B. WHTTTINGTON. 1983. Etneraldella and Leanchoilia, two arthropods from the Burgess Shale, Middle Cambrian, British Columbia. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 300:553-582.
CONWAY MORRIS, S. 1976. Nectocaris pteryx, a new organism from the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale of British Columbia. Neues Jahrb. Geol. Palaontol. Monatsh. 1976:705-713.
GLAESSNER, M. F. 1958. New fossils from the base of the Cambrian in South Australia. Trans. R. Soc. S. Aust. 81:185-188.
GLAESSNER, M. E, AND M. WADE. 1971. Praecambridium—A primitive arthropod. Lethaia 4:71-77.
HUGHES, C. R. 1975. Redescription of Burgessia bella from the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale, British Columbia. Fossils Strata 4:415-435.
MOLLER, K. J., AND D. WALOSSEK. 1985. Skaracarida, a 3. new order of Crustacea from the Upper Cambrian of Vastergotland, Sweden. Fossils Strata 17:1-65. 4.
MOLLER, K. J., AND D. WALOSSEK. 1987. Morphology, ontogeny, and life habit of Agnostus pisiformis from the Upper Cambrian of Sweden. Fossils Strata 19:1124.
WHnnNGTON, H. B. 1977. The Middle Cambrian trilobite Naraoia, Burgess Shale, British Columbia. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 280:409-443.
APPENDIX 2 ANNOTATED LIST OF CHARACTERS
1. Appendages: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
Interpretation of the Vendian fossils Praecambrid-
ium, Vendia, and Parvancorina is difficult and inlike."
cludes some unavoidable speculation. I interpret the seriated structures visible in these first two taxa as appendages or possibly as gut diverticula that extend into the limbs, as in extant pycnogonids (Fig. lc). As for Parvancorina, it is hard to say whether the "corrugations" on the carapace are appendages or wrinkles on the carapace; reconstructions of the appendages (Glaessner, 1979) were criticized b y Bergstrom (1991). Gehling (1991) mentioned u n described specimens that seem to show biramous appendages, but these were not obvious in any material I have seen. Although I have followed Glaessner (1979) in reconstructing the appendages of Parvancorina, I have not scored them as arthropodlike or as biramous.
2. Freedom of appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = all partially free, 2 = last pair partially free, 3 = all completely free.
There has been some debate as to whether Spriggina and its relatives had free limbs or not. On the basis of the material I have seen, I opt for a median position. Birket-Smith (1981) proposed that the lateral ridges represent completely free limbs, but I consider this overinterpretation. I also d o not believe that these ridges were entirely joined, as "quilting" (Bergstrom, 1991) or as annelidlike segments. The ridges were largely joined along their length but were free at the tips and formed laterally directed bulges that I have homologized with true limbs (Fig. Id). The specimen of Spriggina borealis,
7. Limb type for anterior appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = lobopod, 2 = unjointed and flaplike, 3 = jointed, "arthropodlike."
I homologize all appendages as being derived from an ancestral uniramous "lobopod," as suggested by the probable position of tardigrades and/or onychophorans as outgroups to the arthropods in other phylogenetic analyses (e.g., Lauterbach, 1978; Eernisse et al., 1992; Wheeler et al., 1993). This lobopod may transform to an arthropodlike jointed limb, probably as a natural result of cuticle thickening, or flatten to a flaplike limb; Dzik a n d Krumbiegel (1989) gave developmental evidence for this polarity. Flattened appendages could also arise from the endopodite of a primitively biramous limb, the exopodites of which have been lost, as Bergstrom (1986) suggested. Briggs and Whittington (1987) were critical of this idea, and I have not used it.
Bergstrom (1986, 1987) also suggested that the "flaps" of Opabinia are not appendages but pleural extensions of the dorsal tergites. Briggs and Whittington (1987) and Delle Cave and Simonetta (1991) were dubious, and so am I.
8. Lobopod type: 0 = not applicable, 1 = smooth, 2 = few annulations ("telescoping"), 3 = numerous annulations.
Kinchin (1994) cited earlier work that described the "telescoping" appendages of halechiniscid tardigrades as "arthropodan," but no systematic con-
from the Winter Coast of the White Sea, shows the independence of appendage tips somewhat more clearly than specimens of the Australian S. floundersi (Fedonkin, 1985b: pi. 21, fig. 5). Something analogous (not necessarily synapomorphic) may be seen in the posteriormost appendage pairs of Macrobiotus and Milnesium, which are shortened and partially joined (Kinchin, 1994). Valentine (1991, 1994) and Fryer (1992) have put forth scenarios in which appendages arise from rudimentary outgrowths on segmental margins; Dzik's (1991) hypothesis is broadly similar in that legs appear from tubercles of a seriated wormlike animal. For now, I do not accept the specific form of Dzik's hypothesis, that legs are homologous with the paired dorsal bosses of palaeoscolecid worms and armored lobopods. Limb rami: 0 = not applicable, 1 = uniramous, 2 = biramous.
Lamellar rami on anterior biramous appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = lamellar rami present, 3 = reduced to flagella (autapomorphic for Burgessia), 4 = lost.
Extant chelicerates are generally interpreted as having secondarily lost the outer rami of the appendages on the prosoma, and I have extended this interpretation to several Cambrian taxa for which it seems plausible.
5. Walking ramus on posterior biramous appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = present, 2 = absent.
6. Limb type for all appendages except anteriormost ones: 0 = not applicable, 1 = lobopod, 2 = unjointed and flaplike, 3 = jointed stenopod, "arthropod-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  218 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
elusions were drawn. Nielsen (1995) argued that this feature is a synapomorphy for the tardigrades and euarthropods. The possibility of homology merits further study, but at present I have not scored telescoping heterotardigrade limbs as true arthropod appendages. They seem to be functionally different: they can lengthen and shorten by telescoping, unlike arthropod appendages.
Birket-Smith (1981) proposed that Spriggina had annulated lobopodlike legs; this is probably an overinterpretation.
9. Venation of flaplike appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
10. Reversal of terminal appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = no reversal, 2 = reversal.
11. Number of pairs of reversed terminal appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = terminal pair reversed, 2 = last two pairs reversed, 3 = last three pairs reversed.
Three groups show reversal of the posteriormost appendage(s). Heterotardigrades frequently reverse the last pair, and Cambrian marine lobopods frequently reverse the last pair or two pairs, so that the terminal claws, spines, and other leg structures point in the opposite direction from those on the rest of the appendages. This reversal may aid locomotion (Ramskold, 1992), but tardigrades live in very different environments at different Reynolds numbers from the Cambrian lobopods, and the function may not be the same in both taxa. Opabinia also shows reversal of the appendages forming its tail fan; they imbricate in the opposite direction from the rest of its appendages. Anomabcaris is now known to have had a very similar fan (Chen et al., 1994). Bergstrom (1986,1987) argued from this that the flaps making up the tail fan were ventral sclerites, presumably not homologous to the flaplike appendages. Briggs and Whittington (1987) did not accept this, and I see no reason to. The presence of terminal appendage reversal in three groups, in which its functions are very different from each other, suggests that terminal appendage reversal is homologous.
12. Well-developed spines on appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = single row, 3 = double row.
13. Number of terminal claws per appendage: 0 = not applicable, 1 = no terminal claws, 2 = one, 3 = two, 4 = four, 5 = more than four.
These terminal elements are not chelae but rather are sclerotized hooklike claws, as seen in tardigrades, onychophorans, and also some arthropods.
14. Terminal claw morphology: 0 = not applicable, 1 = simple hook, 2 = branched hook.
15. Cephalic digestive caecae: 0 = absent, 1 = unbranched and directed along leading edge of headshield (anchor type), 2 = radiate branching, 3 = single blind, unbranched caecum on midline (autapomorphic for Leanchoilia).
See Gehling (1991) for documentation and analysis of the presence of this character in the Precambrian forms Praecambridium and Maryxoadea.
16. Compound eyes: 0 = absent or simple photoreceptors only, 1 = present.
Dzik (1993) noted the similarity between the dorsal plates of Microdictyon and trilobite schizochroal eyes and hypothesized that the two were homologous. Although the dorsal bosses on fossil lobopods may well have had some sensory function, I consider this homology too far-fetched at this stage of knowledge. Birket-Smith (1981) claimed that Spriggina had compound eyes, but I consider this to be overinterpretation. For discussion of the homology of arthropod eyes, see Paulus (1979).
17. Number of eyes: 0 = not applicable, 1 = paired, 2 = two pairs.
18. Eyes pedunculate: 0 = not applicable, 1 = apedunculate, 2 = singly pedunculate, 3 = several eyes on tubercle.
19. Median eye: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
20. Eye shape: 0 = not applicable, 1 = round, 2 = crescentiform.
21. Eye location: 0 = not applicable, 1 = on headshield, 2 = below headshield.
22. Definite head or cephalon: 0 = head undefined, 1 = definite head.
M. A. Fedonkin (pers. comm. 1993) informed me that the only specimen of Miabemia had a nondescript crescent-shaped head, which was lost during preparation. Accordingly, I have scored this taxon for a broad head (see Fig. lb) but refrain from assumptions as to its head structures.
23. Head separated from body by sulcus: 0 = not applicable, 1 = no sulcus, 2 = sulcus.
24. Head shape: 0 = not applicable, 1 = narrow to equilateral, 2 = broad.
25. Glabella: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
26. Cephalic shield: 0 = none or simple head capsule,
1 = shield present.
27. Shield type: 0 = not applicable, 1 = univalved, 2 =
bivalved.
Hou and Bergstrom (1995) showed that Cardio-
dictyon and Hallucigenia bore a pair of expanded plates covering the head and first pair of appendages; this has been incorporated into my analysis. Simonetta (1988) suggested that the "carapace" of Nectocaris is the peribranchial chamber of a chordate. If this is true, theri Nectocaris should be removed from this analysis. The only fossil of Nectocaris shows no unequivocal gill slits, straight segments instead of "zigzag" myomeres, and large eyes unlike those of early chordates; in my opinion, the evidence for chordate affinities for Nectocaris is interesting but not at all conclusive. More fossils of Nectocaris will probably be necessary to settle the question.
28. Extent of shield: 0 = not applicable, 1 = restricted to head, 2 = extends back over thorax.
29. Cephalic sutures: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
30. Cephalic doublure: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present, 3 = anterior tip only turned up (autapomorphic for Leanchoilia).
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 1996 WAGGONER—PHYLOGENY OF ARTHROPODS AND PROBLEMATICA 219
31. Genal spines: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
32. Number of pairs of cephalic/anterior appendages: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
33. Number of pairs of antenniform appendages: 0,1,2.
34. Mouth location: 0 = terminal, 1 = subterminal to
ventral.
35. Cephalic limbs morphologically specialized as
mouthparts: 0 = not applicable, 1 = no specialization, 2 = gnathobase, 3 = grasping with tip, 4 = fusion into clawed organ (autapomorphic for Opabinia), 5 = Burgessia-type (autapomorphic for Burgessia).
36. Enlargement of mouthparts into raptorial appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = no enlargement, 2 = enlargement.
37. Great appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
Bergstrom (1986, 1987; also Dzik, 1993; Chen et al., 1994) revived and revised an idea that Gould (1989) attributed to Simonetta (1970) and stated that the proboscis of Opabinia was derived from a fusion of two appendages (Simonetta [1970] did not explicitly state this). Bergstrom homologized the proboscis with the paired grasping mouthparts of. Anomabcaris. This homology has been criticized in the past (Briggs and Whittington, 1987), but the close relationship between Anomabcaris and Opabinia was supported in an earlier analysis even when the proboscis of Opabinia was coded as an autapomorphy, not homologous to appendages. In this light, the proposed homology appears more likely and was scored as such in the final cladogram. However, there is no real reason to suggest that the entire proboscis represents a pair of fused appendages (Gould, 1989); it may be more likely that the proboscis of Opabinia represents an elongated preoral body segment whose appendages form the terminal claws (Bousfield, 1995).
anterior appendages enlarged into "great appendages," as do several other Cambrian arthropods.
Dzik (1993) and Bousfield (1995) suggested that
these raptorial appendages are homologous with
those of Anomabcaris. However, Jacobs (1992) sug46. gested that unusual preoral appendages evolved by ectopic expression of posterior segment genes and
thus may have evolved in parallel in a number of lineages. Patterns of gene expression are not easily assessed in fossils with no obvious living analogue; nonetheless, Jacobs's hypothesis should be kept in
mind. I did not homologize arthropod great appendages and anomalocarid raptorial appendages.
The great appendages of Yohoia and Leanchoilia have50. elongated extensions of the distal three or four podomeres, which either form a sort of claw, as in Yohoia, or are elongated and filiform, probably serv51. ing as sensory organs, as in Leanchoilia. Such extensions are sometimes present in anomalocarid appendages but are longest on the proximal 52. podomeres when present (Bousfield, 1995).
38. Circumoral plates: 0 = absent, 1 = present. 53. I have proposed homology between the mouth-
parts of Anomabcaris and Peytoia and aschelminth and tardigrade circumoral structures. The kinorhynch mouth, when retracted, is covered by a circlet of 16 overlapping plates, the placids (Hyman, 1951; Nebelsick, 1993). Anomalocarids had 32 plates of similar shape encircling the mouth. Tardigrades have similar platelike structures, the lamellae, although these are much smaller in relation to body size than the mouthparts of anomalocarids (Kinchin, 1994). Priapulids and kinorhynchs have multiple rows of scalids on the eversible proboscis. Anomalocarids had circlets of serrated teeth inside the pharynx in addition to the large outermost circlet (Whittington and Briggs, 1985); the position and cusps on these internal teeth make them similar to priapulid scalids.
Butterfield (1990a) compared anomalocarid mouthparts with the circumoral plates of the Carboniferous agnathan Pipiscius and suggested that the two might be related. I consider this to be convergence. Anomalocarids lack dorsoventral fins, notochord, postanal tail, and gill slits, and their jointed arthropodlike mouthpart appendages have no counterpart in any chordate.
Eversible pharynx: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
The mouthparts of anomalocarids could be opened and closed in a manner analogous to that of priapulid and kinorhynch mouthparts (Briggs et al., 1994), although it is not likely that they could
be extruded far.
Mouth on proboscis that extends well past first appendages: 0 = no proboscis, 1 = proboscis present. Labrum: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
Trunk appendages diminishing in size: 0 = not applicable, 1 = not significantly diminishing, 2 = diminishing posteriorward, 3 = diminishing both posteriorward and anteriorward.
Appendage attitude: 0 = not applicable, 1 = pendant, 2 = lateral.
Number of total tagma/appendages/segments: 0 = none, 1 = four, 2 = 5-10, 3 = 11-15, 4 = 16-20, 5 = more than 20.
Oral papillae: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
Dorsal cuticle subdivided into serial tergites: 0 = undivided, 1 — simply annulated, 2 = divided. Type of cuticular subdivision or annulation, excluding head: 0 = not applicable, 1 = homonomy (all segments or subdivisions about equal in size), 2 = heteronomy.
Trilobation: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
Thoracic pleurae: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
Pleural fusion: 0 = not applicable, 1 = pleurae unfused, 2 = posterior pleurae fused into pygidium, 3 = all pleurae fused into thoracic shield.
Pleural direction: 0 = not applicable, 1 = all pleurae more or less orthogonal to body, 2 = increasing curvature of pleurae posteriorward.
Pleural overlap: 0 = not applicable, 1 = no overlap, 2 = overlap.
Division of cuticle along central midline: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
43. The arthropods Yohoia and Leanchoilia also have
39.
40.
41. 42.
44.
45.
47.
48. 49.
    Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
  220 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 4 5
54. Trunk papillae: 0 = absent, 1 = present, 2 = enlarged into appendicules.
55. Enlarged dorsal bosses: 0 = absent, 1 = simple bosses, 2 = enlarged plates.
56. Dorsal bosses paired: 0 = not applicable, 1 = unpaired, 2 = paired, 3 = triple.
57. Paired dorsal plate position: 0 = not applicable, 1 = lateral, not touching dorsally, 2 = dorsal, touching or nearly touching.
58. Dorsal boss spines: 0 = not applicable, 1 = nonspinous, 2 = spine extending from center, 3 = fine spine extending from posterior margin, 4 = "fin rays" (autapomorphic for Nectocaris).
59. Other boss ornament: 0 = not applicable, 1 = smooth, 2 = reticulate, 3 = sulcate (autapomorphic for Cardiodictyon).
60. Number of bosses (if single) or pairs (if paired) per body segment: 0, 1, 2, 3.
61. Terminal boss or boss pair: 0 = not applicable, 1 = present, 2 = lost.
62. Tracheae: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
Hou and Bergstrom (1995) speculated that the
numerous long papillae of the Cambrian lobopod Onychodictyon would have had a respiratory function and that these papillae could have been transformed into tracheae by being turned inside out. I chose not to homologize tracheae with papillae. However, the idea could be tested using more information on the development of extant insect and myriapod tracheae and of extant onychophoran tracheae and dermal papillae.
63. Paired midgut diverticulae: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
64. Central body separated from appendages by joint or cuticular fold: 0 = not separated, 1 = separated.
65. Posterior appendages: 0 = not applicable, 1 = all
abdominal appendages present, 2 = reduction of last pair to spine (autapomorphic for Burgessia), 3 = reduction of several to vestigial (autapomorphic for Dasyleptus), 4 = complete loss of several pairs.
66. Differentiation of posterior portion of body: 0 = none, 1 = abdominalization, 2 = extreme reduction or loss.
67. Position of anus: 0 = terminal, between last appendages, 1 = terminal, on an extension of the body past the last pair of appendages, 2 = ventral, on terminal body division, 3 = ventral, on penultimate body division.
In most Vendian fossils, the anus cannot be seen at all. However, the only specimen of Miabemia is fortuitously broken and shows what is probably the hindgut, extending to the posterior tip of the body.
68. Uropods: 0 = not applicable, 1 = absent, 2 = present.
69. Telson: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
70. Telson type: 0 = not applicable, 1 = buttonlike , 2
= flattened, 3 = styliform.
71. Paired ventral plates in addition to/instead of sin-
gle sternite: 0 = absent, 1 = present.
Ventral plates are not always easy to assess in
fossil material. Chen et al. (1994) called attention to paired ventral plates of some sort in anomalopods. They made a strong case that the posited "lobo-
72.
pods" of Kerygmachela (Budd, 1993) could not have been appendages but were ventral plates of some sort. (I have followed this interpretation for now but have not seen the fossils and may need to revise my opinion.) It might be possible to homologize these ventral plates with the ventral bosses of palaeoscolecids, as Dzik (1991) homologized the dorsal bosses of armored lobopods with palaeoscolecid dorsal bosses. Taken to its conclusion, this approach would homologize palaeoscolecid bosses with lobopod dorsal plates, arthropod limbs, and paired ventral plates of various taxa but for now is too conjectural.
Paired caudal cirri: 0 = absent, 1 = unsegmented, 2 = segmented.
I hypothesize homology among the cirri of kinorhynchs, the caudal alae of some heterotardigrades, and the furcae of some arthropods and anomalopods. Delle Cave and Simonetta (1991) called all structures derived from dorsal postanal embryonic material a telson; by this definition, caudal cirri or furcae would be either "legs" or a "telson." They noted that the embryological origin of arthropod furcae are not well known. However, well-developed caudal cirri or furcae are present in organisms such as kinorhynchs, to which this definition is hard to apply. I thus prefer not to homologize cirri with either appendages or a telson. Caudal cirri morphology: 0 = not applicable, 1 = straight and unbranched, 2 = forked or branching. Cuticular sderotization: 0 = unsderotized, 1 = only appendages sclerotized, 2 = most of cuticle sderotized.
I have gauged the degree of cuticular sderotization by the inferred flexibility, resistance to deformation, and where applicable the relief of the fossil. Cuticular structure and composition is likely to be homologous among living arthropods (Cutler, 1980), and the cutides of living tardigrades and kinorhynchs show definite similarities with those of arthropods (Kristensen and Higgins, 1991; Kinchin, 1994), but lack of definite information for fossil taxa precluded the scoring of more than this very general character.
Mineralization of cutide: 0 = unmineralized, 1 = mineralized with CaCO^ 2 = mineralized with CaPO4.
73. 74.
75.
Note added in proof.—Several recent studies bear on the results presented here Collins (19%) has presented new data on Anomabcaris: the organism called Peytoia in this paper is now considered a junior synonym of Laggania. Collins agreed that the anomalocarids and their kin are arthropods; he proposed the name Dinocarida for the taxon that I named Anomalopoda. Collins also stated that the proposed connection between Anomabcaris and Kerygmachela is extremely tenuous. Two new molecular analyses (Winnepenninckx et al., 1995; Garey et al., 1996) support "aschelminth" paraphyly, with priapulids as an outgroup to the arthropods and their allies, and confirm the separation of the annelids and arthropods. Garey et al.'s results also sup-
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 
 APPENDIX 3
Data set used in this analysis, with inapplicable characters scored as a separate "not applicable" character state.
Praecambridium 131101110101102000000112111211100??ll??0?222?00100000000000000?010?11100020
Parvancorina Vendia Mialsemia Bomakellia Spriggina Marywadea Peytoia Anomalocaris Opabinia "C-monster" Nectocaris Facivermis Onychodictyon Aysheaia Luolishania Hallucigenia Microdictyon Cardiodictyon Xenusion Kerygmachela Marrella Sidneyia Canadaspis Skara Olenoides Agnostus Naraoia Cheloniellon Sanctacaris Burgessia Yohoia Leanchoilia Palaeoisopus Dasylq>tus Arthropleura Echinoderes Semnoderes Priapulus Macrobiotus Milnesium Echiniscus Echiniscoides Neostygarctus Peripatus Lithobius Nymphon
13110???01011010000001120112121?01?11??0?22??00100000000000000?1?0?10000020 131101110101100000000112011211100??11?700222?00000001012111120?010?10000020 131102?02101100????0?1220112111?0??????002227000000000000000000110010000020 131102702?71100111111122000001170?????70022372100000001211127071107?7 707020 1111011101011000000001221000011000711?7002257210000000000000007110710000000 1111011101011020000001220000011000?11??00225?21000000000000000?110?10000000 131102302232100112111122000001140132111003230210000000000000000110020011110 131102302103100112111122000001140132111003230210000000000000000110010011110 132212131231100122211121000001110142170071247210000000000000001110021211100 131101130103100000000000000000000011100001230110000010110212207110010000000 131100110101100112112121012111120?lll??0?005?110000010110413?0??40?0000??00 13110013010110000000000000000005001117 7000250110000000000000000110100000000 131101130212310000000000000000011111100001131120000001222221200010010000000 131101130222510000000000000000010032100001131110000001000000000010010000000 131101130101410000000000000000001011170003237120000001131111100010110000000 131101110221310000000000011111130110100101120000000000221211207010110000000 131101110771210000000000000000010110100101130000000000221121200010110000002 1311011107?14100000000000111111301101?010?151000000000222131100010110000000 131101130102770000000000000000000010100103241110000011221211107010010000000 131102132102100000000111000001010742177001230120000001000000007110010012100 132213300101211000010121011112222111100012250210000000000000000110111100020 132413300103100112112122011112111121100011230210112200000000000141221200020 132213300101100112111121012211152121100011150210000000000000000141111101120 132213300101100000000121011112152121100010140211000000000000007140101102220 132213300103212111121122111122241121100011240211122200000000001111211102121 132213300103212000001122111112241121100011120211122100000000001111211100021 132213300101102000000122111112141121100072240211132200000000001110211100021 132213300101100111021122011112152121100011240211112200000000000110711201120 132223300102100111112122111112161131100071240210111201121111200171321200020 132313300101102000000122111211141151100001230210000000000000001120311300020 132423300101100112112123011111240031200012140210111200000000000141211200020 132213300102223000000121011113130111200002130212112200000000000111311300020 131103300102210123211121000001042031100102230210000000000000001141311300020 131103300101100111111121000001031131100012140210000000000000010130211307020 13110330010310000000012100000102113110000125?21111220100000000?110211210020 000000000000000000000121000000000000011000030210000011111311100100000012120 000000000000000000000121012111100000011000030210000011131311100100000012120 000000000000000000000111000000000000011000000110000001000000000000000000000 121101110211320000000111000000000010011001111010000000000000000000210000000 121101110211320000000111000000000010011002111110000000000000000110010000000 131101120212410000000122000000000010001001111210000000222321201110010071120 131101120212510000000121000000000010001001211210000000000000001110010001120 131101120213410000000121000000000010001001211210111101113221201110010002120 131101130101310000000111000000031131100011241110000001000000010010110000000 131103300101100000000121000001041131100011250220000000000000010110111102120 131103300101210123111111000000041031100101220210000000000000001142110000020

  222 SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY VOL. 45
Praecambridium Parvancorina Vendia Mialsemia Bomakellia Spriggina Marywadea Peytoia Anomalocaris Opabinia "C-monster" Nectocaris Facivermis Onychodictyon Aysheaia Luolishania Hallucigenia Microdictyon Cardiodictyon Xenusion Kerygtnachela Marrella Sidneyia Canadaspis Skara Olenoides Agnostus Naraoia Cheloniellon Sanctacaris Burgessia Yohoia Leanchoilia Palaeoisopus Dasyleptus Arthropleura Echinoderes Semnoderes Priapulus Macrobiotus Milnesium Echiniscus Echiniscoides Neostygarctus Peripatus Lithobius Nymphon
1311?111?1?11?20?????112111211100??11??0?222???10???000????0?0?010?11100?20 1311?????1?11?10?????1120112121?01?11??0?22????10???000????0?0?1?0?10?00?20 1311?111?1?11?00?????112011211100??11??00222????0???1012111120?010?10?00?20 131172??21?11?0??????1220112111?0??????00222????0???000????0?00110010?00?20 1311?2??2??117011111112200???ll?0??????00223?21?0??700121112?0?110????0??20 1111711171?11700?77?712210?7711000711?70022572170?770007?770707110710700700
1111711171?ll?20?7??712200?7711000?11770022572170??7 0007?770707110?107007 00 1311?23?22321?011211112200???114013211100323021?0???000????0?00110020?11110 1311723?21?317011211112200?7711401321110032302170??70007?7?0?00110010?11110 13221213123117012221112100???11101421?00?124?21?07?70007???0?01110021211100 13117113?l?31?00?????0?7007?7?7000111000012301170?7710117212207110010700700 1311??11?1?11?0112112121012111120?111??0???5?11?0???1011?413?0??40??0?0??00 13117?13?1?11?00?7???0??00?????500111??00?25011?0?77000???70?001101?0?00?00 1311711372123100???770??00??7?71111110000113112707?701222221200010010700700 1311711372225100777??0?7007?7??1003210000113111?0???010????0?00010010?00?00 13117113717141007?7?70?7007?7?70101117000323?12?0???01131111100010110?00?00 1311?lll?2213100?????0??01111113011?100101120???0??700221211207010110700?00 1311?111???12100?????0??00?????10117100101130???0???00221121200010110?00?02 13ll?lll???14100?????0??01111113011?l?010?151???0?7700222131100010110?00?00 13117113?1?27700?????0?7007????0001?10010324111?0???1122121110?010010?00?00 1311?21321?21?00?????111007??1?10?421??00123012?0???010????0?0?110010?12100 1322133??l?12110???l?12101111222211110001225021?0?77000????0?00110111100?20 1324133??l?31?011211212201111211112110001123021?11220007???0?00141221200?20 1322133??l?ll?011211112101221115212110001115021?07?700077?70700141111101120 1322733??l?ll?00?????12101111215212110001?14021107?7000????070?140171102220 1322133771732121111211221111222411211000112402111222000?7770701111211102121
1322133771732120?777112211111224112110001112021112210007?7 70701111211100721 1322133??l?ll?20??7??1221111121411211000?22402111322000?7??0?01110211100?21 1322133??l?ll?0111?211220111121521211000112402111122000????0?00110?11201120 1322233??l?21?01111121221111121611311000?124021?111201121111200171321200?20 1323133??l?ll?20?????12211121114115110000123021?0???000????0?01120311300?20 1324233771711701121121230111112400312000121402171112000?7770700141211200720 1322133?71?22230?????1210111131301112000021302121122000???70?00111311300720 1311?33??1?221012321112100??71?4203110010223021?0???000????0?01141311300?20 1311733??1?11?011111112100???1?3113110001214021?0?77000?7??0?1013021130??20 1311733??l?31?00???7712100?7?l?2113110000125?21111220107?7?0?0?110211210?20 0???????77????00??7?712100????7000???1100??3021?0???111113111001?00?0?12120 0??????????7??00?????1210121111000???1100??3021?0???111313111001?00?0?12120 0?????????????00?????11100?????000???1100??0011?07??010????0?000?00?0?00?00 1211711172113200????711100?????0001??11001111?l?0?77000????0?000?0210?00?00 1211?111?2113200?????11100?????0001??110021111170???000????0?00110010?00?00 13ll?112?2124100?????12200?????0001??0100111121?0?7700222321201110010?71120 1311711272125100????712100??7?70001?7010012112170??7000????0?01110010?01120 13117112721341007?77712100?????0001??0100121121?111101113221201110010702120 13117113?l?13100??77711100??7??3113110001124111?0???010????0?10010110?00?00 1311733??l?ll?00?????12100???l?4113110001125022?0???000????0?10110111102120 1311733?71712101231111110077???410311001012202170???000????0?01142110?00?20
APPENDIX 4
Recoding of data set used in this analysis, with inapplicable characters scored as missing (?).
  Downloaded from http://sysbio.oxfordjournals.org/ at MBLWHOI Library on June 18, 2012
 