Behav Ecol Sociobiol (2005) 59: 6–11 DOI 10.1007/s00265-005-0002-2
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Milosˇ Krist · Petr Na ́dvorn ́ık · Lenka Uv ́ırova ́ · Stanislav Buresˇ
Paternity covaries with laying and hatching order in the collared flycatcher Ficedula albicollis
Received: 6 December 2004 / Accepted: 21 April 2005 / Published online: 23 August 2005 ⃝C Springer-Verlag 2005
  Abstract Females in most bird species engage in extrapair copulations. Although this behaviour is widespread, benefits for females of doing so are less understood. The most widely accepted hypothesis is that they improve their previous choice of social partner and gain genetic benefits for their offspring. Some evidence for this comes from studies that find that extra-pair young (EPY) have greater fitness than their half-sibs. However, this might be also caused by maternal, non-genetic effect, a possibility that remains largely untested. Here we test whether EPY are laid in larger eggs or eggs laid early in the laying sequence in the collared flycatcher (Ficedula albicollis). The size of eggs bearing EPY and within-pair young (WPY) did not differ, however, EPY were laid in early eggs and consequently hatched earlier than WPY. As hatching asynchrony is a strong determinant of offspring size and survival in many species, including collared flycatcher, our results suggest that a caution is needed when paternal genetic effects are to be inferred from comparison of naturally occurring halfsibs.
Keywords Differential allocation . Extra-pair paternity . Good genes . Hatching order . Maternal effect
Communicated by J. A. Graves
M. Krist (􏻳)
Museum of Natural History,
na ́m. Republiky 5,
771 73 Olomouc, Czech Republic
M. Krist · S. Buresˇ
Laboratory of Ornithology, Palacky ́ University, tr. Svobody 26,
771 46 Olomouc, Czech Republic
P. Na ́dvorn ́ık · L. Uv ́ırova ́
Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Palacky ́ University, Sˇlechtitelu 11,
783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic
P. Na ́dvorn ́ık · S. Buresˇ
Department of Zoology, Palacky ́ University, tr. Svobody 26,
771 46 Olomouc, Czech Republic
Introduction
Female birds frequently copulate with extra-pair males (Jennions and Petrie 2000; Griffith et al. 2002). Typically, females gain no direct benefits from extra-pair copulations (EPCs) and that is why genetic benefits are usually supposed to drive such a behaviour (Jennions and Petrie 2000; Griffith et al. 2002). In the prevailing view the very convincing evidence for this would be the finding that extra-pair young (EPY) had greater fitness than within-pair young (WPY) (Kempenaers et al. 1997; Sheldon et al. 1997; Krokene et al. 1998; Strohbach et al. 1998; Lubjuhn et al. 1999; Johnsen et al. 2000; Sheldon 2000; Whittingham and Dunn 2001; Griffith et al. 2002; Johnsen et al. 2003; Schmoll et al. 2003; Charmantier et al. 2004; Kleven and Lifjeld 2004). However, recently it has been suggested that greater fitness of EPY cannot be regarded as an evidence of their genetic superiority as they may be favoured by maternal (non-genetic) effects. Females might, for example, put EPY in larger eggs (cf. Cunningham and Russell 2000) or in eggs with greater concentration of testosterone (cf. Gil et al. 1999). Such differential allocation would be beneficial for females if extra-pair sires were more attractive than cuckolded males (Burley 1986; Sheldon 2000) which is indeed commonly the case (e.g. Møller and Ninni 1998; Sheldon and Ellegren 1999).
Nowadays many studies exist that have confirmed that differential allocation indeed exists on the level of breeding attempts (review in Sheldon 2000). When mated with attractive mate females were found to invest more in current reproductive attempt either by producing more offspring (e.g. Balzer and Williams 1998) or by investing more resources per individual offspring (Gil et al. 1999; Cunningham and Russell 2000; Kolm 2001; Saino et al. 2002a; Rutstein et al. 2004). The latter mechanism is available also for females to discriminate between EPY and WPY, i.e. to perform within-brood differential allocation. However, this possibility remains largely untested although in fact it may be more strongly selected than allocation between attempts, as the difference in quality of mates may be compared simultaneously, in contrast to between-attempt
  
allocation, when this must be only predicted (together with the probability of surviving to future reproduction).
We know only one study that tested for within-brood differential allocation (Westneat et al. 1995). In that study, females did not feed EPY more than their-half sibs. This is perhaps not very surprising, because birds in general seem to be unable to discriminate related and unrelated nestlings in own broods (Kempenaers and Sheldon 1996). Thus the potential for females to favour young sired by more attractive males would seem to be restricted to pre-hatching period. This idea was the target of two theoretical assessments. In the first, Birkhead et al. (2000) concluded that it may be unfeasible for females to perform such subtle differential allocation. In the second, Sheldon (2000) argued that female differential allocation to EPY could be selected only if EPY are genetically superior to WPY. Although Sheldon’s argument has raised some debate (Colegrave 2001; Cunningham and Russell 2001; Gil and Graves 2001; Sheldon 2001), the idea that every difference between halfsibs must be caused by genetic differences between sires is still widely accepted (see above for references).
Here we show that in the collared flycatcher (Ficedula albicollis) EPY are laid in eggs of the same size as WPY but are put into early eggs in the laying sequence and consequently have advantage of earlier hatching over the WPY. This might lead to improved performance of EPY as compared to WPY.
Methods
Study area and field methods
The study was conducted in the Velky ́ Kos ́ıˇrarea (49◦ 32′ N, 17◦ 04′ E, 370–450 m a.s.l.), central Moravia, the Czech Republic in 2001 and 2002. In the study area, there were five plots with a total number of about 350 nest boxes. Three plots were situated in coniferous (Picea abies) and the other two in deciduous (Quercus petraea) forest. Approximately 60 pairs of collared flycatchers breed in the nest boxes each year. The collared flycatcher is a small, migratory passerine with sexually dimorphic plumage. Males are contrastingly black and white, while females are inconspicuously brownish. Females lay and solely incubate clutches of 4–8 eggs. Extra-pair young occur in a high proportion of the nests (33–43%) in various populations of the species (Sheldon and Ellegren 1999; Veen et al. 2001). Most of females in the collared flycatcher (M. Krist, personal observation) and the closely related pied flycatcher Ficedula hypoleuca (Potti 1998) begin incubation before clutch completion which results in partially asynchronous (sensu Stoleson and Beissinger 1995) hatching of most broods (Potti 1998).
The study area was visited daily during the breeding season. Each egg was numbered according to its position in the laying sequence with a waterproof felt-pen and measured to the nearest 0.01mm with a digital calliper on the day it was laid. We calculated egg volume using the formula: volume=0.51×length×width2 (Hoyt 1979). Two measures
of width were taken in two perpendicular directions and their average was used as a measure of width. Ten to 13 days after the initiation of incubation, the eggs were taken from the nests, put into a thermo-box and then within 10 min of transfer placed into individual compartments in the incubator. Temperature in the incubator ranged between 37–39◦C, humidity between 40–70%. In the meantime, plastic dummy eggs were put into the nests for females to incubate. Only one out of 38 artificial clutches was abandoned and the overall hatching success in the incubator was 80.4%. This is lower value than the natural one (about 93%; M. Krist, unpublished data). Therefore, for the analysis of relationship between hatching order and paternity only nests, in which at most two eggs failed to hatch, were used. Hatchability in these nests was 88.1%. This slightly lower hatchability could negatively effect our results if laying order interacted with paternity in determination of probability of an egg to hatch. However, this was not the case (F1,66=0.11; P=0.741) which indicates that our results were not affected by a bit lower hatchability of eggs.
Incubator was checked for newly hatched young at least every 3h throughout the day and night. Hatching time was recorded for each chick. When hatching was not directly observed, hatching time was approximated as the midpoint between the check when the egg was hatched and the preceding check when the egg was still unhatched. Soon after hatching (mean±SD: 2.95±2.33 hours), the young were marked with nail-varnish on their claws to enable individual recognition and returned to their nest of origin. Nestlings were controlled daily and re-marked as necessary. They were ringed at about 7 days of age and blood sampled (about 25μ) by brachial venipuncture at 10–13 days. Blood samples were transferred to 1 ml of solution of Queen’s lysis buffer. Dead nestlings and unhatched embryos were taken from nests and conserved in 70% ethanol.
Putative parents were caught with nest-box traps while feeding nestlings and blood sampled in the same way as the nestlings. In putative fathers size of three ornamental traits (forehead patch width, forehead patch height and wing patch) which were previously shown to be under sexual selection (Sheldon and Ellegren 1999; Qvarnstro ̈ m et al. 2000) was measured (to the nearest 1 mm). The white patch on the wing was measured as the maximal length of visible white on the sixth primary. Of the 27 putative fathers for which paternity of their offspring was determined, 4 were 1-year olds and, therefore, in subadult plumage; others were older and in adult plumage.
Paternity
The paternity of nestlings was determined using standard molecular methods for the collared flycatcher (e.g. Sheldon and Ellegren 1996; Veen et al. 2001; Michl et al. 2002). In short, DNA was extracted from blood or tissue samples using the phenol–chloroform method. Parentage was determined by comparing the genotypes of putative parents and nestlings at three microsatellite loci: FhU2, FhU3, and
7
 
8
FhU4. Offspring that mismatched their social father at one or more loci were considered to have been fathered by an extra-pair fertilisation. Putative mothers matched their offspring in all cases which indicates that intraspecific brood parasitism and mutations in loci coding for microsatellites are rare or absent in our population. The combined exclusion power of the marker set was shown to be about 96% (Sheldon and Ellegren 1996). The relatively low exclusion power indicates that extra-pair paternity went undetected in a few cases. However, there is no reason to suspect that such cases were, in respect to egg size and laying/hatching order, anything other than a random subsample of all nestlings. Therefore, our results should not be adversely affected by this slight inadequacy. Genetic fathers were not assigned to extra-pair young because the sampling of males on study plots was not complete and at the same time the probability of genotype matching between randomly chosen male and an extra-pair young is relatively high when our markers are used (Sheldon and Ellegren 1996). Thus errors could be done if the male who matched extra-pair young was treated as its genetic father.
Data analysis
To test whether the size of ornaments predicts proportion of EPY in male own nest, model in which sizes of ornaments were included as independent variables and proportion of extra-pair young in male own nest as dependent variable was fitted using PROC GENMOD (brood size=trial, number of extra-pair young in the brood=event, binomial error structure, and logit link function). Because of the marked difference between adult and subadult plumage in this species (e.g. Sheldon and Ellegren 1999), paternal age was included in the above model as the categorical factor (adult plumage vs. subadult plumage).
Eggs hatched in incubator were from clutches ranging in size from five to seven. To enable pooling of nests with various clutch sizes into single analysis, we ranked each egg into one of three categories for analysis: (1) ultimate egg, (2) penultimate egg, and (3) precedent eggs. The same three categories were used for chicks to define their position in hatching order. There is strong biological reason to categorize eggs in this way: most flycatchers begin incubation before the last or penultimate egg is laid (Potti 1998), which results in nearly synchronous hatching of precedent eggs while penultimate and especially ultimate eggs hatch later (Krist et al. 2004). As we were interested in withinclutch relations, egg size was converted to relative egg size by subtracting mean egg volume from the actual volume of the particular egg (i.e. centring). The resulting variable thus represents intraclutch egg-size variation.
To test for a bias in paternity with respect to egg size and laying/hatching order two models were fitted in GLIMMIX macro (generalised linear mixed model with binomial error, logit link, and Kenwardroger method for denominator degrees of freedom). Only nests, in which mixed paternity was detected, were used for these tests. In the first model paternity was the dependent variable, relative egg size and
laying order explanatory fixed variables, and nest explanatory random variable. Initially, interaction between laying order and relative egg size was also tested. It was nonsignificant (F1,81 =0.14; P=0.712) and therefore omitted from the final model. In the second model paternity was the dependent variable, hatching order explanatory fixed and nest explanatory random variable. Laying and hatching order may be modelled either as categorical or continuous variables. Initially we launched both models. Then we chose the models with smaller AIC for presentation. In both cases models with continuous variables are presented based on the above criterion. However, results were similar and significant also when these variables were modelled as categorical factors. All statistical tests are two-tailed and were computed in SAS, version 9.1 (SAS Institute 2004).
Results
In total, 38 broods were raised in an incubator. Subsequently, both putative parents were caught at 27 nests. Extra-pair young were detected in 14 of these nests (51.9%) and comprised 40 of 165 (24.2%) offspring with determined paternity. Paternity was not assigned to five offspring due to their disappearance from the nest or tissue decay.
None of the male ornamental traits predicted proportion of EPY in male own nest after correction for the overdispersion of the data (statistics were adjusted by dispersion parameter: deviance/df) had been applied (male age: F1,22 =0.08, P=0.782; forehead patch height: F1,22 =1.99, P=0.173; forehead patch width: F1,22 =0.86, P=0.363; wing patch: F1,22=0.18, P=0.676). Mean egg volume did not differ between nests with single and mixed paternity [mixed paternity (mean±SE): 1612.3±33.7 mm3 ; single paternity: 1595.5±35.0mm3 ; df=25; t=0.34; P=0.734].
In 14 nests with mixed paternity, 40 young were sired by extra-pair males, 45 young by social males and the paternity of two young remained undetermined. In these nests, proportion of EPY decreased in the laying order (F1,82=6.06, P=0.016; Fig. 1) while the relative size of eggs bearing EPY (mean±SE: −5.82±11.29 mm3) and WPY (2.56±10.65 mm3) did not differ (F1,82=0.59, P=0.442; Fig. 2). Effect of nest as random factor was estimated to be zero in this model. Hatching order was strongly correlated with the laying order (r=0.71, N=59, P<0.001), resulting in the fact that EPY hatched earlier in the hatching sequence than their half-sibs (F1,48=6.79, P=0.012; Fig. 1). Effect of random factor was small also in this model (estimate±SE: 0.022±0.448, Z=0.05, P=0.480).
Discussion
Our study is the first test whether females discriminate against WPY in the pre-hatching period. We did not find evidence for differential resource allocation as measured by egg size (Fig. 2). Note that the scale of y-axis is small because relative egg volume is displayed. Thus in the nest with the largest difference between mean volumes of eggs
  
100
 80
 60
 40
 20
  0
hatch earlier in the hatching sequence than WPY. As in most other altricial birds (Magrath 1990; Stoleson and Beissinger 1995), hatching asynchrony is a strong determinant of offspring size and survival in the collared flycatcher (Krist et al. 2004) as well as in the closely related pied flycatcher (Hillstro ̈m 1999). Thus, our finding suggests that EPY might have greater fitness than WPY as a result of earlier hatching.
If mothers did favour EPY through increased resource investment, in egg size (Cunningham and Russell 2000) or carotenoids (Saino et al. 2002a), for example, this could be in fact regarded as another evidence for genetic superiority of EPY (Sheldon 2000) as it is hard to imagine other reason for female differential investment in half-sibs. However, in the case when the advantage to EPY is driven by hatching asynchrony, the situation is markedly different. Although by proper timing of copulations and onset of incubation females might still favour EPY because of their greater reproductive value (Sheldon 2000), non-adaptive scenarios are also possible. This is because both timing of extrapair copulations and onset of incubation are, in contrast to differential resource investment into chicks of different paternity, under diverse selective pressures. Females might, for example, pursue EPCs early in the fertile period to insure the whole clutch against social mate infertility and begin incubation before the completion of the clutch to reduce the risk of nest predation (or from about 20 another reasons, see Magrath 1990; Stoleson and Beissinger 1995). EPY then might have greater fitness as a result of early hatching regardless of their genetic quality.
Our study was not designed to discriminate whether EPY are genetically better than WPY. Consequently it is not clear whether females may gain fitness benefits by earlier hatching of EPY. The only available information for assessment of potential genetic difference between half-sibs forms our observation that the occurrence of EPY was unrelated to social mates’ ornaments. This suggests that females did not perform EPCs to improve the previous choice of social partner to obtain ‘good genes’ for their offspring (see Møller 1992). However, this conclusion must be regarded with caution as more informative test would involve paired comparison of cuckolded fathers and their cuckolders. Unfortunately, we are unable to perform such test as genetic fathers could not be reliably assigned in this study. Moreover, EPY might be genetically better than WPY as a result of inherited complementary genes (Jennions and Petrie 2000; sensu Pia ́lek and Albrecht 2005) in which case no relationship between paternal ornaments and offspring fitness would be expected. In fact, we have previously shown using similar sample of nestlings that EPY tended to be in better condition than WPY even after hatching asynchrony is controlled for (Krist et al. 2004), which might suggest that EPY are really genetically better than WPY. So, the question about adaptive value of earlier hatching of EPY for females remains unresolved for the present.
Nevertheless, the possibility that earlier hatching of EPY is only by-product of selection pressures operating in other contexts suggests that fitness difference between half-sibs should not be used to infer paternal genetic
Proportion of extra-pair young in particular position in laying (filled bars) and hatching (open bars) order in nests with mixed paternity. Numbers indicate sample size
80
40
0
-40
-80
-120
social
extra-pair
9
  58 37
 14 11
13 11
        Fig. 1
precedent penultimate laying/hatching order
ultimate
          Fig. 2 Mean volumes of eggs fertilized by either the social or extra-pair males. Lines connect values in the same nest. Relative egg volume is given (see methods)
bearing WPY and EPY this difference is just 104.7 mm2 which is likely to be too small difference to cause any effect on offspring performance (Krist et al. 2004). It should be stressed, however, that our measure of resource investment in eggs was only a crude one as it relies on size of egg as a surrogate of investment. Recently, however, it has been found that females may change also egg composition in dependence on mate attractiveness. The substances that were found to be differentially allocated at the level of breeding attempts include steroid hormones (Gil et al. 1999), carotenoids (Saino et al. 2002a), and immunoglobulins (Saino et al. 2002b). Future studies of differential within-brood allocation should therefore target also on egg composition, although it may be difficult to imagine mechanism that would enable such allocation (Birkhead et al. 2000).
In contrast to non-significant results regarding differential resource investment through egg size, we have found that in the collared flycatcher EPY are put in earlier eggs in the laying sequence than WPY and consequently also
relative egg volume (mm3) proportion of extra-pair young .

10
effects, unless artificial fertilization is performed in vitro (Barber and Arnott 2000; Sheldon et al. 2003; Neff 2004; Evans et al. 2004) or hatching asynchrony is controlled for (Johnsen et al. 2000). In fact, as hatching asynchrony is process operating only within broods, comparison of half-sibs to infer paternal genetic effects may be less reliable approach than that using correlation between paternal trait (that is involved in female mate choice) and offspring fitness, provided that fathers are disassociated from their offspring (see Norris 1993). This is because in the latter method estimate of paternal effect is based mainly on offspring from single-paternity broods (as far as these are more frequent than those with mixed paternity). In this subsample of broods hatching asynchrony does not bias estimate of paternal genetic effects.
Clearly more studies are needed to test for non-genetic differences between naturally occurring half-sibs to see how general this phenomenon is. Remarkably, however, our results are in accord with two another published pieces of evidence. First, in an experimental study on the same species it was found that extra-pair copulations are, in contrast to within-pair ones, avoided late in the female fertile period (Michl et al. 2002). Such pattern could lead to under-representation of EPY in late eggs as was found in our study. Second, EPY were placed in early eggs also in another passerine, the house sparrow (Cordero et al. 1999), in which hatching is like in the collared flycatcher partially asynchronous (see Veiga 1992). Taken together, these results suggest that non-genetically based difference in performance of naturaly occurring half-sibs may be more widespread than was previously thought.
Acknowledgements We thank T. Grim, V. Pavel, V. Remesˇ, B. C. Sheldon, E. Tkadlec, K. Weidinger and several anonymous referees for valuable comments or discussion on several drafts of the manuscript. J. Stˇr ́ıtesky ́ greatly helped in the field. K. Weidinger kindly provided us plastic eggs. We owe forest enterprise Cˇ echy pod Kos ́ıˇrem for providing the nest-boxes and the caravan. M. K. thanks Kacˇenka for encouragement and support. This study was supported by grants from the Czech Ministry of Education (MSM 6198959212) andfromGACˇR(No.206/03/0215).Thestudywasapprovedandsupervised by the Ethical Committee of Palacky ́ University and complies with the current law of the Czech Republic.
References
 