               Toxicon xxx (2012) 1–6
    Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Toxicon
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/toxicon
 Short communication
On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes
Nicholas R. Casewell*
Alistair Reid Venom Research Unit, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK
articleinfo abstract
   Article history:
Received 9 January 2012
Received in revised form 15 February 2012 Accepted 22 February 2012
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Molecular evolution Ancestral reconstruction Toxin
Serpentes
Venom Metalloproteinase SVMP
ADAM
Snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) are large multi-domain proteins that are classified (P-I, P-II and P-III) based on the presence or absence of additional nonproteinase domains that extend the metalloproteinase domain (Fox and Serrano, 2005, 2008). A number of SVMPs exhibit evidence of post-translational modifications, such as the processing of domains and/or the formation of multimeric structures (Fox and Serrano, 2005, 2008). The generation of this large multi-locus gene family that encodes distinct SVMP scaffolds is likely the result of frequent gene duplication followed by adaptive evolution (Juárez et al., 2008; Casewell et al., 2011a). Notably, SVMPs can be major toxin components of snake venoms (particularly those of viperid snakes), with representation of functionally distinct isoforms from multiple sub-classes frequently observed (Junqueira-de-Azevedo and Ho, 2002; Gutiérrez et al., 2008; Casewell et al., 2009; Wagstaff et al., 2009). The diverse functions of these
* Tel.: þ44 (0)151 705 3162.
E-mail address: n.r.casewell@liv.ac.uk.
0041-0101/$ – see front matter ! 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.02.006
Tracing the evolutionary history of proteins can reveal insights into gene alterations responsible for changes in structure and function. Here, the origin of snake venom metalloproteinases was rigorously reassessed using phylogenetics and the reconstruction of ancestral sequences. Basal SVMPs are most closely related to ADAM 7, 28 and decysin-1 proteins. Reconstructing the evolutionary history of these proteins and their hypothetical ancestors reveals progressive alterations in the amino acid composition and structural characteristics of ADAMs/SVMPs through evolutionary time.
 ! 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
proteins (reviewed in Fox and Serrano, 2005) can cause a spectrum of severe local and cardiovascular pathologies that often manifest in victims of viper envenoming.
The SVMPs are classified as adamalysins, which, alongside the matrixins, astacins and serralysins, make up the large metizincin gene super-family (Bode et al., 1993; Huxley-Jones et al., 2007). Within the adamalysins, the SVMPs are grouped with ADAM (a disintegrin and a metalloproteinase) and ADAMTS (ADAM with thrombospondin motifs) proteins because of their sequence homology, particularly in the region of the metalloproteinase domain (Fox and Serrano, 2005; Huxley-Jones et al., 2007). ADAMs contain additional domains absent in SVMPs and are widely recognised as highly diverse proteins, with functional roles including the shedding of membrane-bound protein domains and acting as molecular switches that activate other proteins by proteolysis (Black et al., 1997; Srour et al., 2003; White, 2003; Blobel, 2005). In contrast, the ADAMTSs, which contain additional thrombospondin motifs and lack a disintegrin-like domain, can be broadly defined as substrate-specific secreted proteases (Apte,
             Please cite this article in press as: Casewell, N.R., On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes, Toxicon (2012), doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.02.006
 
               2 N.R. Casewell / Toxicon xxx (2012) 1–6
2004; Gerhardt et al., 2007). Evidence from molecular phylogenetics suggests that ADAM and ADAMTS proteins originate from a common ancestor (Andreini et al., 2005) and that SVMPs have evolved from an ADAM gene that was recruited into the ‘venome’ of snakes at the base of the advanced snake (Caenophidia) radiation (Moura-da-Silva et al., 1996; Fry, 2005; Fry et al., 2008). Previous analyses imply that this ancestrally recruited gene was likely an ADAM 7 or ADAM 28 ancestor (Moura-da-Silva et al., 1996; Fry, 2005). However, the inclusion of closely related outgroup sequences from species basal to the split of (i) the reptiles from all other vertebrates and (ii) the snakes from all other reptiles, are required to rigorously test this hypothesis and elucidate the origin of SVMP recruitment into snake venom. The recent publication of the Anolis carolinensis (the Carolina anole – a lizard) genome (Alföldi et al., 2011) presents a timely opportunity to test this hypothesis.
To investigate the evolutionary origin of SVMPs, phylogenetic analyses were undertaken on a comprehensive sequence dataset (n 1⁄4 122; amino acid positions 1⁄4 949) containing basal SVMPs (i.e. from the Elapidae and Atractaspidinae) identified by Casewell et al. (2011a), alongside ADAM and ADAMTS sequences isolated from the genomes of Homo sapiens, Danio rerio (zebrafish) and A. carolinensis (Huxley-Jones et al., 2007; Alföldi et al., 2011). Following translation of DNA sequences into amino acids and alignment in MEGA5 using MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004; Tamura et al., 2011), an adamalysin gene tree was produced using Bayesian inference and incorporating the WAG þ G model of sequence evolution selected by ModelGenerator (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck, 2003; Posada and Buckley, 2004; Keane et al., 2006). Bayesian inference analyses were undertaken in duplicate, using four chains simultaneously (three heated and one cold) for 5  106 generations, sampling every 500th cycle from the chain, with default settings in regards to priors (cf. Casewell et al., 2011a, 2011b). Tracer v1.4 (Drummond and Rambaut, 2007) was used to estimate effective sample sizes and to verify the point of ‘burnin’ (cf. Casewell et al., 2011a, 2011b). The sequence alignment file can be accessed by its unique doi identifier (doi:10.5061/dryad.fd5q0p68) at the bioscience data repository Dryad (http://datadryad.org/).
The adamalysin gene tree reveals that the ADAMTS proteins are non-monophyletic and basal to a strongly supported clade containing the ADAMs and SVMPs (Fig. 1). Considering ADAMTS and ADAM proteins have been identified in the genomes of Drosophila melanogaster (fruitfly) and Ciona intestinalis (tunicate), the split of ADAMs from ADAMTS proteins appears to predate the divergence of the protostome and deutrostome lineages (>1000 Mya) (Hausdorf, 2000; Huxley-Jones et al., 2007). Within the ADAM/SVMP clade, the SVMPs are monophyletic (Fig. 1), highlighting that their recruitment into snake venom was likely the result of a single origin following the divergence of the Pareatidae from the remaining Caenophidians (w60 Mya – Vidal et al., 2009), as previously described elsewhere (Moura-da-Silva et al., 1996; Fry, 2005; Fry et al., 2008; Casewell et al., 2011a). Adaptive evolution of SVMP genes duplicated from this ancestral scaffold is presumably responsible for driving the subsequent evolution and
diversification of SVMP structures observed in the venom of Caenophidians (Casewell et al., 2011a).
Notably, the SVMPs form a strongly supported monophyly with mammalian ADAM 7, ADAM 28 and ADAM decysin-1 (ADAM DEC1) and reptilian ADAM 28 proteins (Fig. 1). Critically, incorporating ADAM sequences from non-mammalian species does not invalidate the previous hypothesis that the recruitment of the ADAM scaffold into the arsenal of venomous snakes was likely an ancestral form of an ADAM 7 or ADAM 28 protein (Moura-da-Silva et al., 1996; Fry, 2005). The closest ancestor to the SVMPs, a protein annotated as ADAM 28 isolated from the genome of the lizard A. carolinensis (Alföldi et al., 2011), has yet to be functionally characterised. Because this gene exhibits comparable sequence similarity to both mammalian ADAM 28 (56%) and basal SVMPs (54%), interpretation of the evolutionary history of the ADAM genes presented here will focus on the more characterised mammalian forms.
ADAM 7 is expressed in the epididymus of mammals and thought to enable sperm motility and fertilisation acquisition (Oh et al., 2009), whilst mammalian ADAM 28 is expressed in a variety of tissues and associated with integrin binding and facilitating enzymatic cleavage of the extracellular matrix and the transendothelial migration of lymphocytes (Fry, 2005; McGinn et al., 2011). Since mammalian ADAM DEC1 forms a monophyly with mammalian ADAM 7 and ADAM 28, it should also be considered when assessing the evolution of SVMPs. The function of ADAM DEC1 remains unclear – whilst it is expressed in macrophages and dendritic cells and associated with pathogenesis of the lungs during sarcoidosis (Shapiro, 2003; Crouser et al., 2009), the proteolytic function of this ADAM remains unknown. ADAM DEC1 is an atypical ADAM because it exhibits loss of the cysteine-rich domain and partial loss of the disintegrin domain (Bates et al., 2002). This is significant because the evolutionary history of the SVMPs is punctuated by domain loss (Mourada-Silva et al., 1996; Casewell et al., 2011a) and strongly suggests that the ancestor of SVMPs and their related ADAMs (ADAM 7, 28 and DEC1) were predisposed to truncation. The close relationship between ADAM 7, ADAM 28 and ADAM DEC1 proteins has been noted previously – they cluster together on the same human chromosome and it has been suggested that they may have originally shared functionality, prior to partial gene duplication at this locus giving rise to their later diversification (Bates et al., 2002). Considering that the diversification of venom genes in the Caenophidians is thought to be largely the result of gene duplication (Kordis and Gubensek, 2000; Fry et al., 2003; Lynch, 2007; Casewell et al., 2011b), it will be interesting to see if future genome studies identify whether SVMP gene duplication events are also localised on the same chromosome and whether the ancestral SVMP gene exhibits synteny with its lizard and mammalian homologues.
Tracing the evolutionary history of venom gene families is a valuable tool for elucidating the timing and nature of the basal scaffolds that were originally recruited into venom. Subsequent analysis of predicted changes identified in derived proteins may reveal insights into amino acid substitutions (replacements) responsible for structural and
    Please cite this article in press as: Casewell, N.R., On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes, Toxicon (2012), doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.02.006
 
               N.R. Casewell / Toxicon xxx (2012) 1–6 3
 Fig. 1. Phylogenetic analysis of the adamalysin gene family. A) Bayesian gene tree demonstrating the phylogenetic relationship of ADAMTS, ADAM and SVMP genes. Labels have been removed from the branches to facilitate presentation of the results. Nodes with black circles received a Bayesian posterior probability of 1.00 and nodes with grey circles >0.95. The outgroup sequence is Drosophila melanogaster [GenBank: NP_726248]. B) Expanded view of the box highlighted in (A) demonstrating the phylogenetic relationship of the SVMPs and their closest ancestors. Note that the derived SVMP radiation has been collapsed to facilitate presentation of the results (cf. Casewell et al., 2011a for the evolutionary history of this radiation).
functional alterations. An understudied approach to elucidating venom protein evolution is the reconstruction of ancestral proteins (reviewed in Liberales, 2007) where the sequence composition of hypothetical ancestors, represented by the internal nodes in a gene tree, are reconstructed to reveal the predicted structure of evolutionary intermediaries which cannot be directly sampled (i.e. because they do not exist). Here, ancestral ADAM/SVMP proteins representing key internal nodes in the adamalysin gene tree were reconstructed to investigate the predicted molecular composition and structure of the physiological protein that was originally recruited into the ‘venome’ of snakes.
The sequence alignment and phylogenetic relationship described above were pruned to contain the most basal SVMPs (Naja atra: 126035683 and Ophiophagus hannah: 124007159) and their closest non-venom ancestors (reptilian ADAM 28 and mammalian ADAM 7 and ADAM 28 – ADAM decysin-1 was excluded due to the atypical loss of sequence information which can interfere with ancestral sequence reconstruction), before sequence reconstruction of ancestral nodes was undertaken using the maximum likelihood ancestors criterion in MEGA5 (Tamura et al., 2011). Fig. 2 displays the phylogenetic relationship of the proteins used for analysis and the ancestral nodes that were reconstructed, alongside a sequence alignment comparing the amino acid composition of extant proteins with their inferred ancestral counterparts. Subsequently, the structure
of each extant and reconstructed protein was predicted using Phyre (Kelley and Sternberg, 2009) to produce high confidence three-dimensional macromolecular models (all generated structures were modelled on the crystal structure of VAP2 from Crotalus atrox [protein data bank accession number: 2DW2] as selected by Phyre). The predicted models were then analysed in the Swiss-PdbViewer (Guex and Peitsch, 1997) by computing and rendering the molecular surface, before models were coloured by the predicted accessibility, hydrophobicity and positive and negative charge of each protein. To visualise changes in the amino acid composition of ADAM/SVMP proteins through evolutionary time, residues inferred to have been modified following the split of extant sequences from their ancestors (i.e. along each branch in the gene tree) were mapped to the macromolecular structures in YASARA (www.yasara.org). Macromolecular models displaying changes in: (i) amino acid composition through evolutionary time (i.e. from each node to the next node or branch tip), (ii) predicted surface accessibility and (iii) regions of positive charge can be found mapped to the gene tree in Fig. 2.
Aligning the amino acid sequence of basal SVMPs with related ADAM proteins revealed that cysteine residues are conserved between these two groups and are also shared with their hypothetical ancestors (Fig. 2). These results emphasise that the gain and loss of additional cysteine residues thought to be important for facilitating structural changes and post-translational modifications of SVMPs (e.g.
    Please cite this article in press as: Casewell, N.R., On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes, Toxicon (2012), doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.02.006
 
               4 N.R. Casewell / Toxicon xxx (2012) 1–6
 Fig. 2. Phylogenetic relationship and sequence conservation of extant and ancestrally reconstructed ADAM and SVMP sequences. A) Schematic Bayesian phylogeny of basal SVMPs and their close ancestors. Macromolecular structures of extant proteins are displayed at each branch tip and ancestrally reconstructed proteins at each internal node. Dark grey structures (i) display predicted changes in amino acid residues (highlighted in red) between nodes and branch tips. Predicted surface accessibility structures (ii) are displayed by multicoloured models, with a colour scale of red to blue, where red represents high accessibility. Light grey structures (iii) display changes in regions of positive charge (highlighted in blue). B) Partial percentage identity alignment of sequences used in, and generated by, ancestral reconstruction analysis. Asterisks highlight conserved cysteine residues. The sequence alignment was generated and annotated in Jalview (Waterhouse et al., 2009) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).
    Please cite this article in press as: Casewell, N.R., On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes, Toxicon (2012), doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.02.006
 
               formation of multimeric structures and proteolyticprocessing – cf. Fox and Serrano, 2005, 2008; Juárez et al., 2008) are the direct result of mutation following the recruitment of the SVMP scaffold into venom. In line with observations of conserved structural residues, changes to the predicted three-dimensional macromolecular structures appear to occur gradually throughout evolutionary time (Fig. 2).
However, it is notable that an increase in the number of amino acid replacements have been predicted to have occurred from: (i) the ancestor of A. carolinensis ADAM 28 and the ancestor of the SVMPs (i.e. ancestor 2) to the ancestor of the SVMPs (i.e. ancestor 3) and (ii) the ancestor of the SVMPs to the basal SVMPs (from O. hannah and N. atra) when compared with those resulting in A. carolinensis ADAM 28 and ancestor 1 (see Fig. 2). This may be the result of adaptive evolution driving the neofunctionalization of the ancestral ‘non-toxin’ protein for a role in snake venom (e.g. Lynch, 2007; Juárez et al., 2008; Casewell et al., 2011a). Changes in the surface accessibility of ADAM/SVMP proteins through evolutionary time appear to be subtle, with modifications to the metalloproteinase domain seeming to be predominately responsible for predicted alterations in protein–protein interactions (Fig. 2). Intrinsically this makes sense, because, despite the loss of additional domains from the P-I and P-II classes through evolutionary time (Moura-da-Silva et al., 1996; Casewell et al., 2011a), the metalloproteinase domain that is basal to the P-IIIs is retained throughout all SVMP classes. Finally, while no obvious associations between the hydrophobicity or negative charge of SVMPs and their ancestors could be inferred here (data not shown), the intensity of the positive charge associated with regions of the ADAM and SVMP macromolecular structures appears to decrease along the branch leading to the SVMP clade and its members (Fig. 2).
Reconstructing the evolutionary history of genes alongside their hypothetical ancestors can be a powerful tool for elucidating changes in the amino acid composition, structure and function of related proteins. Applying these techniques here reveals that the single recruitment of the ADAM scaffold into the venom of snakes was likely an ancestor of reptilian ADAM 28 and mammalian ADAM 7, ADAM 28 and ADAM DEC1 proteins. Basal SVMPs exhibit similar structural characteristics to their ancestors emphasising that SVMP genes have evolved considerably following their recruitment in to venom, and that adaptive changes occurring alongside frequent gene duplication are likely responsible for generating the large number of functionally-diverse SVMP isoforms that are observed in venom.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Camila Renjifo and Robert Harrison (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, UK) for assistance with YASARA and valuable discussions relating to the content of the manuscript.
Conflict of interest statement
The author declares that there are no conflicts of interest.
Ethical statement
The author can confirm that there are no ethical considerations relating to the research conducted for submission of the manuscript entitled “On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes” by Nicholas R Casewell.
N.R. Casewell / Toxicon xxx (2012) 1–6 5
   Please cite this article in press as: Casewell, N.R., On the ancestral recruitment of metalloproteinases into the venom of snakes, Toxicon (2012), doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.02.006
 