    SHORT COMMUNICATION
Brain plasticity over the metamorphic boundary: carry-over effect of larval environment on froglet brain development
N. TROKOVIC*, A. GONDA*, G. HERCZEG*, A. LAURILA & J. MERILA ̈ *
*Ecological Genetics Research Unit, Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Population and Conservation Biology ⁄ Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology Center, Uppsala University, Norbyva ̈ gen, Uppsala, Sweden
Keywords:
amphibia;
brain size; competition; metamorphosis; phenotypic plasticity; predation;
tadpole.
Abstract
Brain development shows high plasticity in response to environmental heterogeneity. However, it is unknown how environmental variation during development may affect brain architecture across life history switch points in species with complex life cycles. Previously, we showed that predation and competition affect brain development in common frog (Rana temporaria) tadpoles. Here, we studied whether larval environment had carry-over effects in brains of metamorphs. Tadpoles grown at high density had large optic tecta at metamorphosis, whereas tadpoles grown under predation risk had small diencephala. We found that larval density had a carry-over effect on froglet optic tectum size, whereas the effect of larval predation risk had vanished by metamorphosis. We discuss the possibility that the observed changes may be adaptive, reflecting the needs of an organism in given environmental and developmental contexts.
Introduction
Phenotypic plasticity induced by environmental heterogeneity is ubiquitous. Plastic responses are often adaptive, improving the organism’s fitness in the environment where plasticity is expressed (e.g. Schlichting & Pigliucci, 1998; Miner et al., 2005). However, as environmental conditions change during an individual’s lifespan, an adaptive plastic response might turn maladaptive unless it is reversible. This is especially germane to organisms with complex life cycles, which are characterized by discrete life stages often living in very different environments (Pechenik, 2006). Whereas there are examples of reversible plasticity (e.g. Bro ̈nmark & Miner, 1992; Padilla, 1998; Van Buskirk, 2002; Relyea, 2003), apart from a few well-known model systems, little is known about the ontogeny of phenotypic plasticity and
Correspondence: Nina Trokovic, Ecological Genetics Research Unit, Department of Biosciences, PO Box 65, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland.
Tel.: +358 9191 57802; fax: +358 9191 57694;
e-mail: trokovic@mappi.helsinki.fi
to what extent plastic changes expressed at early life stages are carried over to later life stages.
Early-life experience can have a strong influence on behaviour during later life stages. As the brain is the centre of the nervous system, and brain architecture and behaviour are intimately correlated (Burns & Rodd, 2008; Wilson & McLaughlin, 2010), their plastic responses are also expected to correlate. This might be especially true in the light of the high plasticity of brain that has been demonstrated at different anatomical levels in several taxa (reviewed in Van Praag et al., 2000; Mohammed et al., 2002). For instance, an enriched environment has been shown to induce larger cerebella in fish (Kihslinger & Nevitt, 2006) and increased hippocampal neuronal growth in mice (Kempermann et al., 1997). However, there are very few studies addressing the persistence of such plastic changes in brain architecture induced by early experience (but see Lisney et al., 2007). Even less is known about the capacity for biotic and abiotic ecological factors to induce phenotypic plasticity in brain, or how long lasting these changes may be. Specifically, are these plastic changes in brain morphology transitory, or do they persist over major
a 2011 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 24 (2011) 1380–1385 1380 JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY a 2011 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
doi: 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2011.02275.x

life-history transitions and, ultimately, throughout an individuals’ life?
In amphibians, several studies have found that environmental conditions experienced as larvae carry over to the juvenile stage, especially in life history and morphological traits (e.g. Altwegg & Reyer, 2003; Relyea, 2007; Gomez-Mestre et al., 2010; Tejedo et al., 2010). For example, studies on intraspecific competition and predation risk in larval anurans have demonstrated strong plastic responses to these factors in both morphological and behavioural traits, some of which have carried over the metamorphic boundary to the terrestrial froglet phase (Brockelman, 1969; Relyea & Hoverman, 2003; Relyea, 2007). Although the brain has been shown to be affected by environmental conditions in lower vertebrates (e.g. in fish: Kihslinger & Nevitt, 2006; Gonda et al., 2009, 2010), to our knowledge only one study investigated the effect of different environmental factors on brain development in amphibians (Gonda et al., 2010). Furthermore, as the amphibian neural system undergoes rapid and dramatic changes during metamorphosis (Burggren & Just, 1992), studies on how the larval environment affects the brain structure of metamorphosed frogs are likely to prove interesting. In amphibians, different brain parts have different functions (for reviews see Wilczynski, 1992; Lannoo, 1999), and their relative size may reflect the importance or utility of the brain. It has been shown that changes in demand alter the number and size of components, making the relative size of different brain parts a reliable predictor of their importance for the given organism (Kotrschal et al., 1998). Density has been shown to influence development of the olfactory and visual sensory areas of brain in both fishes and amphibians (Gonda et al., 2009, 2010). Development in high density increased the size of the optic tectum (a brain part involved in processing visual information) in both studies. Hence, we expected that metamorphs from the high-density treatment would also develop larger optic tectum than those from the lowdensity treatment.
Here, we investigated whether plastic effects of intraspecific competition and predation risk experienced during the aquatic tadpole stage were carried over the metamorphic boundary to the brain structure of terrestrial, juvenile frogs. In a previous study, we found that common frog (Rana temporaria) tadpoles reared at low density and under predation risk developed relatively small brains, and tadpoles grown at high densities developed larger optic tecta and smaller medulla oblongata than those grown at low densities (Gonda et al., 2010). Here, we extend the previous study by asking (i) does larval intraspecific competition and ⁄ or predation risk influence brain size of metamorphs; (ii) which brain regions are affected by these treatments; (iii) do predation risk and competition have synergistic effects on brain size; and (iv) do brain phenotypes in metamorphs correlate with the observed changes in tadpole brains?
Materials and methods
Experimental animals
Samples of 12 freshly laid Rana temporaria egg clumps (ca. 500 eggs per clump) were collected in a population in central Sweden (Stora Almby, Uppsala municipality, 59°51¢N, 17°28¢E, altitude 40 m) on 8 April 2008. Eggs were transported to the laboratory in Uppsala and reared in family-specific 3-L vials containing reconstituted soft water (APHA 1985; changed every 3 days) at a constant temperature of 18 °C until hatching and reaching developmental stage 25 (complete absorption of external gills; Gosner, 1960).
Experiments were conducted in plastic tanks (36 · 40 · 90 cm) placed in a fenced field in Uppsala. Tanks were filled with 90 L of water, 10 g of dried leaves (Betula sp., Populus tremula) and 4 g of rabbit pellets, inoculated with 1 L of pond water, and covered with mosquito netting to prevent colonization by insects. To allow algal growth, tanks were established 2 weeks before the beginning of the experiment.
Experimental treatments included low and high larval density, crossed with the presence and absence of a caged predator. On April 21, 100 tadpoles from each of the 12 clutches were pooled into a bucket and allocated to each tank (high density = 50 tadpoles ⁄ tank; low density = 10 tadpoles ⁄ tank; densities are within the natural range experienced by wild tadpoles of R. temporaria: Laurila, 1998; A. Laurila, personal observation). In tanks with the predator treatments, one dragonfly larva (Aeshna sp.) was placed in a cylindrical cage (diameter 8 cm; height 21 cm) made of transparent plastic film with a double net bottom (mesh size 1.5 mm) and hung 6 cm over the tank bottom. This allowed tadpoles to receive both visual and chemical cues from the predator, although the predator was unable to actually prey on tadpoles. In the no-predator treatment, the cage was left empty. During the experiment, tadpoles relied on the initial resources provided (leaves and rabbit pellets), as well as subsequent algal growth. Predators were fed with R. temporaria tadpoles (ca. 300 mg) every other day. Each treatment combination was replicated eight times, resulting in a total of 32 experimental units. Treatments were assigned randomly among the tanks.
Five tadpoles from the low-density treatments and six individuals from the high-density treatments were removed from each tank on May 17 to study brain morphology (Gonda et al., 2010). The remaining tadpoles were left in tanks, and checked every second day as they approached metamorphosis. The metamorphs at Gosner stage 43–44 (four limbs and largely unabsorbed tail) were removed, anaesthetized with an overdose of MS 222 (tricaine methanesulphonate) and fixed in 4% formalin – 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline solution. The experiment was terminated 30 June when at least four individuals from each tank had metamorphosed.
a 2011 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 24 (2011) 1380–1385
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY a 2011 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
Brain plasticity in frogs 1381

1382 N. TROKOVIC ET AL.
Body and brain measurements
A total of 143 metamorphs (4–5 per tank) were used for analyses. Formalin-fixed metamorphs were weighed with a digital balance. After dissection, dorsal and right lateral views of brains were photographed with a digital camera (Canon EOS 10D; Canon Inc., Tokyo, Japan) connected to a dissecting microscope (Wild M5A; Wild, Heerbrugg, Switzerland). For bilateral structures, only the right-hand side was measured. We could only measure two dimensions for each brain part (length and width of telencephalon, diencephalon and optic tectum, and height and width of medulla oblongata) because some of the borders of the brain parts could not be identified accurately, making three-dimensional estimations impossible (see Gonda et al., 2010). Measurements were taken from digital photographs using tpsDig 1.37 software (http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/), and were defined as the greatest distance enclosed by the given structure in the given direction. All brains were photographed and measured three times. Repeatability of different brain measurements was high [R = 0.71–0.96 (mean = 0.86)].
Statistical analyses
In order to control for the allometric relationship between brain size and body size (e.g. Northcutt et al., 1978), all variables were log10 transformed. We had several measures (two per brain part) to describe brain size and structure. In order to collapse the original variables into one variable describing the given structure, we applied principal component analyses (PCAs; for a similar approach, see Gonda et al., 2010). First, we ran a PCA on all variables (length and width of telencephalon, diencephalon and optic tectum, and width and depth of medulla oblongata) to describe ‘brain size’ with a single variable. Only the first PC was informative, describing general brain size (see Results). Separate PCAs were performed for the different brain parts (telencephalon, diencephalon, optic tectum and medulla oblongata). The first PCs were always informative and described the size of the given brain part (see Results). We used these PCs in the subsequent analyses.
We used general linear model (GLM), with predation and density treatments and their interaction included as fixed factors, and untransformed body weight as dependent variable to analyse variation in body size. To test for treatment effects in brain size, we ran a GLM with the PC describing brain size as the dependent variable, predation, density and their interaction as fixed factors, and body weight as a covariate. For the different brain parts, we used GLMs with the PC describing the given brain structure’s size as the dependent variable, predation, density and their interaction as fixed factors, and both body weight and the PC describing brain size as covariates. We used the replicate mean values in all these
analyses. We used the SPSS 15.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and STATISTICA 8.0 (StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA) statistical software.
Results
There was a significant density effect on body size, but no effect of predation, or a significant interaction term (density: F1,28 = 236.33, P < 0.001; predation: F1,28 = 1.16, P = 0.29; density · predation: F1,28 = 1.03, P = 0.32). Common frogs metamorphosing in the low-density treatment were on average three times heavier than conspecifics in the high-density treatment (Fig. 1a).
The first principal component (PC1) from the PCA of the eight original brain variables accounted for 74.2% of the variance. All variables loaded strongly and positively
 (a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1 Effects of density and predation treatments on body size and brain development in Rana temporaria metamorphs. (a) Density effect on mean body weight (raw value), (b) density effect on mean relative optic tectum size and (c) predation treatment effect on mean relative diencephalon size. Error bars depict 95% confidence intervals. In (b) and (c), plotted are least squares means correcting for body weight and overall brain size.
 a 2011 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 24 (2011) 1380–1385 JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY a 2011 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

on PC1 (0.83–0.97) except diencephalon length (0.43). Hence, PC1 was interpreted as a general descriptor of brain size. Variation in general brain size was independent of all treatment effects (P ‡ 0.23) depending only on body weight (F1,27 = 27.66, P < 0.001).
Principal component analyses on the four different brain parts revealed similar patterns: the original variables (two per structure) always loaded strongly and positively on the first principal component (0.81–0.98), and as such, were good size proxies for the respective brain structures. There was a marginally significant density effect on relative optic tectum size (density: F1,26 = 4.21, P = 0.0505; predation: F1,26 = 0.45, P = 0.51; density · predation: F1,26 = 0.003, P = 0.96) which was improved after removal of the nonsignificant interaction term (F1,27 = 4.49, P = 0.043). Metamorphs in the high-density treatment developed larger optic tecta than their conspecifics in the low-density treatment (Fig. 1b). A significant predation effect on relative diencephalon size was also detected (density: F1,26 = 0.97, P = 0.33; predation: F1,26 = 6.49, P = 0.017; density · predation: F1,26 = 0.53, P = 0.47). In the presence of predators, metamorphs had smaller diencephala than in the absence of predator (Fig. 1c). The treatments had no effect on the relative size of telencephalon (P ‡ 0.17) and medulla oblongata (P ‡ 0.37). Brain size had a positive relationship with size of all brain parts (P £ 0.003), whereas body size did not covary with the respective brain parts (P ‡ 0.14).
Discussion
Our main finding is that larval environment can affect brain structure in metamorphs. We found a significant positive density effect on optic tectum size: metamorphs raised at high density developed larger optic tecta as compared with those raised at low density. Predation risk on the other hand, was negatively related to diencephalon size: metamorphs raised under high predation risk developed smaller diencephalon. In comparison with our previous study on tadpoles from the same experiment (Gonda et al., 2010), we found that the density effect on optic tectum persisted throughout metamorphosis, whereas the effect of density on medulla oblongata disappeared. As discussed in the following paragraphs, we suggest that some of these results may indicate adaptive carry-over responses over the metamorphic boundary.
Most importantly, density effects on the optic tectum remained the same in tadpoles and metamorphs. At both stages, we found that the optic tectum (responsible for vision) was larger at high densities. This result can be explained in an adaptive context with brain regions important in a particular context developing more than those of less importance (e.g. Lisney etal., 2007). Accordingly, we suggest that intraspecific competition at high larval density may increase visual needs resulting
in enlarged optic tecta, with a resultant carryover effect observed at the metamorph stage. However, this may also reflect a mere developmental constraint from larval to juvenile stage (larval traits being developmentally tied to adult traits) with no adaptive value. Alternatively, as density-dependent competition among juvenile frogs can be intense (e.g. Harper & Semlitsch, 2007; Berven, 2009), the level of larval competition may prepare the tadpoles for the intensity of intraspecific competition faced as froglets. There is growing body of evidence demonstrating carry-over effects from larval stages on post-metamorphic growth and performance (Altwegg & Reyer, 2003; Relyea, 2007; Hagman et al., 2009; Gimenez, 2010; Gomez-Mestre et al., 2010; Tejedo et al., 2010). As juvenile survival and adult reproductive success are correlated with size-atand time-of-metamorphosis (e.g. Semlitsch et al., 1988; Altwegg & Reyer, 2003; Berven, 2009), these effects are likely to be reflected in both individual fitness and population growth. Although we did not test visual performance directly, our results on increased optic tectum size under high competition are suggestive of a carry-over effect from the aquatic larval stage to the terrestrial juvenile stage. Reports of diminished optic tectum volume in blind cavefish (Soares et al., 2004) and in fossorial vs. nonfossorial frog species (Taylor et al., 1995) support this idea, indicating that optic tectum size can decrease under conditions in which the importance of this brain part diminishes.
Results pertaining to the other brain structures were less clear-cut. The negative effect of perceived predation risk at low density on total brain volume and the negative effect of high density on the size of medulla oblongata, observed at the tadpole stage (Gonda et al., 2010), were absent at the metamorph stage, whereas telencephalon size was unaffected at both stages. The absence of a density and predator effect on relative medulla oblongata size are perhaps not unexpected, as functions controlled by the medulla oblongata in tadpoles may become less important at the froglet stage. In anurans, the medulla oblongata receives inputs from auditory and lateral line systems (Fritzsch et al.,1984; Templin & Simmons, 2005). Following the switch from an aquatic to a mostly terrestrial life, the lateral line system degenerates whereas the auditory system undergoes radical changes resulting in transient deafness in metamorphs (Boatright-Horowitz & Simmons, 1997). While tadpoles seem to favour auditory and lateral line systems rather than vision under low density and predation risk, any potential trade-off between the size of the two brain parts (optic tectum and medulla) vanishes after or during metamorphosis, much like the importance of the lateral line system.
Interestingly, there was no treatment effect on diencephalon size at the tadpole stage, but a negative predation effect appeared at metamorphosis. We suggest that this result cannot be interpreted as an adaptive response as tadpole-stage predation pressure by aquatic
a 2011 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 24 (2011) 1380–1385
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY a 2011 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
Brain plasticity in frogs 1383

1384 N. TROKOVIC ET AL.
insects is unlikely to be correlated with predation risk for the terrestrial froglets. General physiological or developmental constraints caused by the stress of perceived predatory risk could be responsible. Alternatively, this observation could be explained in terms of trade-offs in allocation of energy, i.e. energy resources allocated to increased growth were not available for brain growth. Compensatory growth before metamorphosis in the predation treatment may have reduced energy available for brain development, reflected in smaller diencephalon size. In support of this idea, compensatory growth in zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) was shown to negatively affect cognitive performance possibly through neural changes (Fisher et al., 2006).
In accordance with previous studies (e.g. Brockelman, 1969; Relyea & Hoverman, 2003), we found strongly reduced metamorph mass in the high-density treatment. Also in accordance with many previous studies (Relyea, 2007), we found no effect of predation risk at size at metamorphosis. In contrast to observations in tadpoles which show a strong negative effect of predation on body weight at low density (Gonda et al., 2010), predator effects were absent in metamorphs. We suggest that this could be explained by the decreasing vulnerability of tadpoles to dragonfly predators as tadpoles grow (Caldwell et al.,1980; Hettyey et al., 2011), which may allow the tadpoles to accelerate growth before metamorphosis and fully compensate the predator-induced reduction in larval body weight by metamorphosis. This is in accordance with earlier studies on a variety of organisms showing that early growth rate constraints (including predation) can be compensated for by subsequent accelerated growth (reviewed in Dmitriew, 2011).
In conclusion, we found that larval environment– affected brain structure of metamorphs. Tadpoles grown at high density had larger optic tecta at metamorphstage, whereas tadpoles grown under predation risk had smaller diencephalon. The most prominent finding of this study is the carry-over effect of larval competitive environment on froglet optic tectum size. Whereas density effects largely remained unchanged, predation effects observed at the tadpole-stage vanished in froglets.
Acknowledgments
We thank Carin Andersson for help in conducting the experiments, Mirva Turtiainen for help in measuring and processing the brains, and Scott McCairns for comments and correcting the English. The experiment was carried out under the permission C 72⁄8 by the Ethical Committee for Animal Experiments in Uppsala County. Our study was supported by the Swedish Research Council (A.L.), Centre of Excellency in Evolutionary Genetics and Physiology (J.M. and N.T.), Ella and Georg Ehrnrooth foundation (N.T.) and the Academy of Finland (G.H. and J.M.).
References
a 2011 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 24 (2011) 1380–1385 JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY a 2011 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
