   Molecular Ecology (2012) 21, 1918–1930 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05412.x
Hidden diversity in diatoms of Kenyan Lake Naivasha: a genetic approach detects temporal variation
KATHLEEN R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING,* LAURA S. EPP,† MARTIN H. TRAUTH‡
and RALPH TIEDEMANN*
*Unit of Evolutionary Biology ⁄ Systematic Zoology, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, KarlLiebknecht-Strasse 24-25, Haus 26, D-14476 Potsdam, Germany, †National Centre for Biosystematics, Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, ‡Institute of Earth and Environmental Science, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
Abstract
This study provides insights into the morphological and genetic diversity in diatoms occurring in core sediments from tropical lakes in Kenya. We developed a genetic survey technique specific for diatoms utilizing a short region (76–67 bp) of the ribulose-1,5bisphosphate carboxylase⁄oxygenase large subunit (rbcL) gene as genetic barcode. Our analyses (i) validated the use of rbcL as a barcoding marker for diatoms, applied to sediment samples, (ii) showed a significant correlation between the results obtained by morphological and molecular data and (iii) indicated temporal variation in diatom assemblages on the interand intra-specific level. Diatom assemblages from a short core from Lake Naivasha show a drastic shift over the last 200 years, as littoral species (e.g. Navicula) are replaced by more planktonic ones (e.g. Aulacoseira). Within that same period, we detected periodic changes in the respective frequencies of distinct haplotype groups of Navicula, which coincide with wet and dry periods of Lake Naivasha between 1820 and 1938 AD. Our genetic analyses on historical lake sediments revealed interand intra-specific variation in diatoms, which is partially hidden behind single morphotypes. The occurrence of particular genetic lineages is probably correlated with environmental factors.
Keywords: diatoms, DNA barcoding, historical DNA, intra-specific variation, rbcL, tropical lake sediments
Received 1 April 2011; revision received 6 November 2011; accepted 9 November 2011
Introduction
Genetic analysis of lake sediment core samples is a relatively new approach in palaeoecological surveys. It has been applied to historical samples from Antarctic lacustrine, temperate marine sediment cores (Coolen et al. 2004, 2006, 2007, 2009), the Mediterranean Sea (Coolen & Overmann 2007), as well as on temperate (MatisooSmith et al. 2008) and tropical lake sediments (Epp et al. 2010). Most genetic investigations on environmental samples focus on bacterial communities, while studies on eukaryotic plankton like haptophytes and diatoms (Coolen et al. 2004) or metazoans such as rotifers (Epp et al. 2010) are rare so far. Continuous genetic
Correspondence: Kathleen R. Stoof-Leichsenring, Fax: 0049-3319775070; E-mail: stoof@uni-potsdam.de
records like lake sediments not only provide the possibility to analyse changes in species assemblages, but also trace the population structure and history of single species in the course of environmental change. This exciting new area of research offers the possibility to analyse changes in biodiversity that cannot be viewed with classical microscopic methods.
Research on historical DNA from environmental samples is methodologically challenging because of the extremely small amounts and the degraded nature of the DNA molecules and the high risk of contamination (Willerslev & Cooper 2005). Favourable conditions for the preservation of DNA include anoxia, high sulphide concentrations (Coolen et al. 2004), and low temperatures (Smith et al. 2001). Frozen sedimentary records, such as permafrost soils or the bottom of ice cores, have yielded the oldest findings of environmental DNA
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 (Willerslev et al. 2003, 2007) and higher latitude areas are most suitable for the retrieval of sedimentary ancient DNA (Haile et al. 2009). But most samples available to research will stem from less favourable areas and the full potential of sedimentary DNA needs to be evaluated. Further, there is still the need to establish that DNA is stratified in continuous sediment sequences, as vertical DNA leaching has been reported from soils (Haile et al. 2007).
Lakes in the eastern branch of the East African Rift System in Kenya (Fig. 1) are perfectly suited to investigate the impact of environmental changes on biodiversity on different taxonomic levels, because they are in close proximity, but display strikingly different hydrological and environmental features: They range in alkalinity from pH 11 (Lake Elmenteita) to pH 8.5 (Lake Naivasha), in salinity from 300 lS ⁄ cm (Lake Naivasha) to 20 mS ⁄ cm (Lake Sonachi) and in depth from <1 to 15 m. The lakes have experienced drastic fluctuations in water level and environmental conditions, both on geological timescales (Trauth et al. 2005) and during the last hundreds of years (Verschuren 2001). In particular,
Lake Naivasha experienced drastic environmental changes in climate and human impact over the last two centuries (Ballot et al. 2009; Hubble & Harper 2001; Stoof-Leichsenring et al. 2011).
In palaeolimnological studies, diatoms in lake sediments are frequently used as bioindicators to infer ecological changes that have occurred within a lake and its surrounding catchment (Osborne 2000). Diatoms are particularly well suited as environmental proxy because they are very sensitive to variations in water nutrient content, salinity and pH. The lifestyle of diatoms can be classified according to their occurrence relative to the water body of a lake, that is, planktonic, littoral, epiphytic or benthic. Some diatoms are able to form resting stages, resting cells or resting spores, to survive periods of unfavourable conditions (Chen et al. 2009; McQuoid & Hobson 1996; Round et al. 1990; Sicko-Gaod et al. 1989).
Traditionally, diatom species are distinguished according to morphological characters of their frustules. Recent molecular evidence and mating experiments, though, have shown that traditional species delimitations are too coarse. Similar morphotypes may include several genetically and⁄or reproductively distinct lineages, which have been termed pseudoand semicryptic species, for example Pseudo-Nitzschia (Lundholm et al. 2006) and Sellaphora pupula agg. (Behnke et al. 2004). As a robust taxonomic system for diatom species is still lacking, genetically based diatom species identification can provide relevant additional resolution.
To this end, rbcL and cytochrome oxidase I (COI) are considered suitable genes for barcoding diatoms (Evans et al. 2007). RbcL is a single locus plastid gene and hence occurs in multiple copies in a single diatom cell. A high copy number is particularly advantageous for investigating historical samples with degraded DNA. For the rbcL gene, an increasing number of diatom reference DNA sequences are available in GenBank. This gene has also been used in many barcoding studies on various plant species (Evans et al. 2007; Hofreiter et al. 2000), and recently for diatoms (Hamsher et al. 2011). Being a chloroplast gene, the likelihood of amplifying DNA from nonphotosynthetic organisms is much reduced as lake sediment samples contain a mixture of DNA from various other organisms, like heterotrophic protists, fungi, and zooplankton.
In this study, we aim to compare diatom diversity obtained from morphological and genetic analyses to track changes in communities, species and distinct genetic lineages that might be correlated with environmental change. We investigated diatom diversity in tropical East African lakes using a genetic approach specifically designed for lake sediment samples, that is the amplification of a short fragment of the rbcL gene.
Fig. 1 Sampling locality. Eastern branch of the East African Rift System and its lakes. Red dot indicates coring locality in Lake Naivasha.
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
HIDDEN GENETIC DIVERSITY IN KENYAN DIATOMS 1919

1920 K. R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING ET AL.
We directly compared morphological and genetic diatom data obtained from a short sediment core, providing a continuous record from the freshwater Lake Naivasha for the last two centuries.
Materials and methods
Core sampling
Samples used in this study comprise two parallel sediment cores from Lake Naivasha (NSA-3 ⁄ 4), which were collected from the centre of Lake Naivasha in August 2007 with a KC Kajak sediment core sampler (KC-Denmark A ⁄ S). A transparent coring tube was used, and the core was extruded in the field. The core lengths (37.8 cm for NSA-3 and 35.4 cm for NSA-4) were limited by our inability to penetrate deeper into the compacted sediment. Samples from the NSA-4 core were used for 210Pb dating, while the NSA-3 samples were taken for diatom determination, as well as they were used to analyse sediment type and organic content (Stoof-Leichsenring et al. 2011). Both cores were sampled at 2.1-cm intervals. The DNA samples were taken and stored as described in Epp et al. (2010).
210Pb Chronology
Oven-dried subsamples from the Lake Naivasha sediment core NSA-4 were analysed for 210Pb, 226Ra and 137Cs by direct gamma assay in the Liverpool University Environmental Radioactivity Laboratory using Ortec HPGe GWL series well-type coaxial low background intrinsic germanium detectors (Appleby et al. 1986). Detailed description of the 210Pb chronology is given in Stoof-Leichsenring et al. (2011).
Diatom counting
Diatom counting was performed for the samples NSA-31 to NSA-3-18 obtained from the Lake Naivasha sediment core NSA-3. Between 0.25 and 0.35 g of sample material was processed for 90 min in 15-mL Falcon tubes containing 4 mL of 30% H2O2 and placed in a water bath at 80 °C to remove any organic matter. After adding 10 lL of 2 N HCL, the sample tubes were filled with deionized water and incubated overnight at 10 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and the samples were washed with deionized water before being centrifuged at 1000 g for 4 min. This washing step was repeated four times, after which 1:4 and 1:10 solutions were prepared and samples settled on cover slips and dried overnight before being mounted on glass slides using NaphraxÔ. Diatom species identification was carried out using a Leica DM 4000B optical microscope at 1000-fold magnifica-
tion. A total of 300–500 valves were counted per slide. The diatom species were determined following the classification principles of Hustedt (1949), Gasse (1986) and Krammer & Lange-Bertalot (1986–1991). Diatom percentages were zoned using stratigraphically constrained cluster analyses with ZONE, an unpublished software tool provided by S. Juggins, University of Newcastle.
DNA isolation of sediment core samples
DNA isolation was performed using the PowerSoilÔ DNA Isolation Kit (MoBio Laboratories, CA, USA). The PowerSoilÔ-bead solution was transferred to a sterile Eppendorf tube. The samples and buffer were mixed well just prior to isolation and 500 lL of each sample ⁄ buffer-mixture were transferred to the bead solution tube. The sample was centrifuged at 10 000 g for 1 min and the supernatant was removed (remaining sediment weight 150–200 mg). The PowerSoilÔ-bead solution and the buffer C1 included in the kit were added and the sample vortexed briefly. Subsequent release of the DNA from the cells and ⁄ or sediment matrix was achieved by bead beating with the Mini-BeadBeater for 3 min at 1000 ⁄ min. The remaining protocol was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
All laboratory procedures were carried out adhering to strict precautions necessary to ensure authenticity of results for work with ancient DNA (Gilbert et al. 2005; Coolen et al. 2009). The isolation of core samples was carried out in a historical DNA laboratory physically separated from the general molecular biology laboratory. Isolation was carried out for three or seven samples at a time, with the addition of one negative control, for which the isolation was carried out using only the chemicals. Samples were isolated under a Hepa-filtered UV-hood, with UV-sterilization effective for at least one hour before and after samples had been unpacked and processed at the workspace. Gloves were changed between touching samples and between all subsequent laboratory steps.
Primer design and PCR
We constructed an alignment including about 130 GenBank entries of rbcL sequences mainly from freshwater diatoms and a close outgroup sequence of Bolidomonas pacifica (Bolidophyceae). Further, less closely related algae taxa were added to the alignment, namely, a green algae (Ulva ohnoi), a chrysophyceae (Ochromonas sp.), a haptophyte (Emiliania huxleyi), eustigmatophyceae (Eustigmatos magnus, Nannochloropsis oculata), a raphidophyceae (Chattonella antiqua) and diatom endosymbionts of dinoflagellates (Gelidium rex, Peridinium balticum). The final alignment was used to identify dia-
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

tom-specific regions for potential primer binding sites and to ensure nucleotide variability among diatoms within the amplified fragment. From this alignment, two primer pairs specific for diatoms were designed using the program OLIGOÒ (Rychlik & Rychlik 1989), amplifying a short fragment of 76 bp (rbcL_76) and a nested shorter fragment of 67 bp (rbcL_67) of the gene for the large subunit of the ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase ⁄ oxygenase (rbcL). The respective primer pairs were analysed for their specificity using the ECOPCR package (Ficetola et al. 2010, available at http://www.grenoble.prabi.fr/trac/ecoPCR). We performed an in silico PCR on a database compiled from the complete EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database downloaded from ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/ embl/release/ (release embl_105, September 2010), which presents a list of all sequence entries that could potentially be amplified by these primers, including taxonomic information. For the in silico PCR, the following parameters were used: (i) amplicon lengths between 20 and 1000bp and (ii) a maximum of three errors between the query sequence and the primer sequence, but no errors allowed in the last two bases at the 3¢ end. As an estimate of the specificity of the primers to diatoms, we calculated the percentage of diatoms among the in silico amplificates, excluding sequences with uncertain taxonomic identification (i.e., sequences named ‘uncultured’ or ‘unidentified’). We, furthermore, analysed the expected taxonomic resolution capacity of the amplicons by calculating the ratio of unambiguously identified diatom taxa for a given taxonomic level over the total number of amplified diatom taxa (Ficetola et al. 2010). To evaluate the taxonomic coverage (Ficetola et al. 2010), we performed an in silico PCR as described earlier on a separate database containing only diatom sequences of the amplified region. This was constructed by downloading all sequences available for the rbcL gene in bacillariophyceae from GenBank (on 16 July 2011), aligning these and keeping only such sequences spanning the amplicon (317 sequences derived from 175 species). Prior to working with the sediment DNA extractions, the primers were tested in the laboratory on single species from algal cultures morphologically detected in the sediment core (cf. Table S1, Supporting information) and additional algae cultures from Cyclotella pseudostelligera, Fragilaria pinnata, Navicula salinicola, Nitzschia amphibia, Stauroneis smithii, Synedra radians and Thalassiosira weissflogii. The following reagents were added for a diatom-specific PCR amplifying the rbcL_76 fragment: primers Diat_rbcL_705F (AAC AGG TGA AGT TAA AGG TTC ATA YTT) and Diat_rbcL_808R (TGT AAC CCA TAA CTA AAT CGA TCA T), each at final concentration of 0.32 mM, 1 mM Tris–HCl, pH 9.0, 5 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.4 mM of
each dNTP, 1.5 U Taq polymerase (Qbiogene) and 2– 4 lL DNA template solution. This PCR set-up was prepared in the historical DNA laboratory. Subsequently, amplifications were performed in the physically separated PCR laboratory according to the following reaction profile: The PCR tubes were transferred to the cycler preheated to 94 °C, followed by one cycle at 94°Cfor2min,50cyclesat94°Cfor30sat43.6°Cfor 30s, 72°C for 30s and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. Boon et al. (2002) report that a second round of PCR can detect additional rare haplotypes ⁄ infrequent taxa. In comparison with a simple repetition of the initial PCR, the advantage of a nested PCR is, that if a wrong PCR fragment was amplified in the first PCR, the probability is very low that the region would be amplified a second time by the second set of internal primers. Thus, nested PCR increases sensitivity, while maintaining specificity. Hence, it is often used on samples with assumed low content of target DNA (Grote et al. 2002). In this study, a selection of sediment core samples (NSA-3-1 and NSA-3-12 to NSA-3-18) were amplified in an initial PCR with the primers Diat_rbcL_705F and Diat_rbcL_808R; a second (nested) PCR was carried out using the internal primers Diat_rbcL_708F (AGG TGA AGT TAA AGG TTC ATA CTT DAA) and Diat_rbcl_802R (CCC ATA ACT AAA TCG ATC ATA AYR AT). In this way, we applied two types of PCRs, first, the 50 cycles PCR and second, a two-step PCR to maximize haplotype diversity obtained from the sediment core samples. The two-step PCRs were performed in a total volume of 37.5 lL, containing 1 mM Tris–HCl, pH 9.0, 5 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 0.2 lM of both forward and reverse primers and 0.75 U Taq polymerase (Qbiogene). Amplifications of initial and nested PCRs were performed using the following reaction profile: PCR tubes were heated to 94 °C, followed by one cycle at 94 °C for 30min, 30 cycles at 94°C for 30s, 43.6°C for 30s, 72°Cfor30sandafinalextensionat72°Cfor10min. The amount of DNA template solution varied between 2 and 4 lL for the initial PCR. Set-up of nested PCRs using 1 lL of the initial PCR product was always conducted under a UV-sterilized hood in the general PCR laboratory. Amplifications of core sediment samples were run in a Biometra T-Personal thermocycler (placed under a separated UV-hood and exclusively used for historical DNA). A negative control was included in each PCR and nested PCR set-up. If any sign of amplification occurred in any of the negative controls on an agarose gel, all amplificates were discarded. If a PCR product was too weak, amplifications were concentrated using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf) at 60 °C for 10 min. PCR products were checked again and were prepared for cloning. All PCR products were cloned
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
HIDDEN GENETIC DIVERSITY IN KENYAN DIATOMS 1921

1922 K. R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING ET AL.
using the Topo TA cloning kit (Invitrogen). Depending on the success of the cloning experiment, as many positive clones as available (up to a maximum of 32) were sequenced. Selected samples were cloned twice or three times and the results are presented combined for these sample. In total 779 clones, originating from 29 separate cloning experiments were sequenced.
Postsequencing analyses and phylogenetic inference
Sequences retrieved from cloning were aligned using the CLUSTAL W module with default settings as implemented in BIOEDIT (Hall 1999), and haplotypes were defined. To exclude single polymerase errors being considered true variation, only such haplotypes were considered authentic, which were more than one mutational step apart from one another or—if differing only by a single mutation, which were confirmed by at least two clones. Haplotypes in which stop codons occurred were excluded from the data set. Nucleotide statistics were calculated using DNASP v4.0 (Rozas et al. 2003).
The taxonomic identity of the defined diatom DNA sequences was inferred using a Bayesian phylogenetic approach to assign a probability of taxonomic origin to DNA sequences, as implemented in SAP v. 1.0.6. (http://ib.berkeley.edu/labs/slatkin/munch/StatisticalAssignmentPackage.html; Munch et al. 2008; with settings 0.2 for significance value, 10 for best hits and 0.8 for minimum similarity). This method has been shown to be less prone to problems associated with Blast searches, as SAP provides a statistical measure of phylogenetic relationships among a set of selected sequences of species. As for any method, the certainty of the taxonomic assignment will depend on the completeness of the available reference data set. While this has no impact on the general findings on haplotype occurrence ⁄ turnover reported in our article, incompleteness of the reference data set publicly available will compromise the validity of the taxonomic assignment. As custom in many barcoding studies, we applied a pragmatic and simple threshold approach: We calculated intrastrain genetic variability for our rbcL_76 fragment for diatoms where several sequences are available for a single species ⁄ strain (Sellaphora laevissima, Accession number EF143265, EF143309; S. pupula, Accession number EF143321, EF143318, EF143317). Within these strains, a divergence of 1–6 bp occurred, translating into 1.3–8% within strain sequence divergence. According to these findings, all haplotypes that differed <8% to a species-specific GenBank sequence (corresponding to similarity 92–100%) were assigned to that species. These haplotypes were abbreviated with a six-letter code containing the first three letters of genus and species name. If haplotypes showed a similarity below
92% to any reference sequence, they were not assigned to a species, but to the respective diatom family. To distinguish these haplotypes from those for which a species name was assigned, they were abbreviated with a letter code consisting of only three letters, corresponding to the first three letters of the family name.
In additiion, a phylogenetic inference within the data set of obtained sequences was carried out with MRBAYES (Huelsenbeck & Ronquist 2001) using B. pacifica as an outgroup. Two independent runs were performed for 1 000 000 generations. Major clades of the obtained phylogenetic tree were analysed independently constructing 95% probability parsimony networks with TCS (Clement et al. 2000).
Richness estimation, diversity indices and correlation tests
The estimation of haplotype richness for the morphological and genetic data was performed using the program EstimateS by R.K. Colwell (Version 8.2.0). The richness estimators Chao1, computed along with log-linear 95% confidence intervals, and Ace (abundance-based coverage estimator) estimate the species richness by adding a correction factor to the observed number of species (Chao 1984; Chao & Lee 1992). Rarefaction curves based on the genetic data (clone sequences) were calculated for each sediment core sample using the free software ECOSIM Version 7.72 (Gotelli & Entsminger 2011). In this case, rarefaction curves estimate the haplotype richness for a subsample of the pooled total haplotype richness, based on all haplotypes actually discovered. Curves reaching saturation indicate that the diversity spectrum of the sample is complete and cannot be increased by analysing an additional number of clones.
Diatom diversity was calculated using the Shannon–
i1⁄41
Weaver diversity index (H) (H 1⁄4 􏰀
number of genera⁄species⁄haplotypes in a certain data set and pi = relative frequency of the genera ⁄ spe-
cies⁄haplotype i in a data set) and the gene diversity
Px 2 􏰀 x 􏰋
(D) (D 1⁄4 1 􏰀
the probability that two randomly taken genotypes are different (Nei 1987). Using the same formula, we also calculated the species diversity based on the morphological data. Diversity indices based on the morphological and genetic data were compared using Spearman correlation tests (using the FREE STATISTICS Software, Wessa 2011, available at http://www.wessa.net/ rwasp_spearman.wasp). Further, Spearman correlation tests were performed to compare between morphological and genetic diatom data and for the comparison of genetic data and climate variability in the NSA-3 core. For this, species ⁄ haplotypes were assigned to one of
Px 􏰈
pi ln pi ; x = total
 i1⁄41
pi 􏰈 x􏰀1 ). The gene diversity calculates
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 four classes (1—littoral species ⁄ haplotype; 2—littoral ⁄ epiphytic species ⁄ haplotype; 3—littoral ⁄ planktonic species ⁄ haplotype; 4—planktonic species ⁄ haplotype). The correlation test between climate variability (meaning East African rainfall anomaly data, see Nicholson 2001) and frequencies of Navicula clade B haplotypes was calculated using the average rainfall data of a 10-year period spanning each data point (samples NSA-3-13 to 18) and an index ranging from )1 to 1 ()1—only haplotypes of Navicula group 1; 1—only haplotypes of Navicula group 2) which was used to characterize the haplotype composition of each sample.
Results
Chronology of the NSA-3 core
The chronology of the NSA-core revealed an age of about 1820 AD for the deepest sample, such that the core covers the last two centuries of the lakes history (see Stoof-Leichsenring et al. 2011 for details of the 210Pb chronology).
Morphological analysis of diatoms from the NSA-3 core
Thirty-nine diatom species were identified from the Naivasha sediment core NSA-3 (Table S1, Supporting
information). The relative abundances of the major genera are plotted in Fig. 2. Three diatom assemblage zones were identified in the core. Zone I, between 38.7 and 29.5 cm, corresponds to the time interval between 1820 and 1896 AD (samples NSA-3-18 to NSA-3-15). This zone is dominated by littoral and epiphytic diatoms like Gomphonema gracile Ehrenberg (up to 26%), Cymbella muelleri Hustedt (up to 22%), Navicula elkab Mu ̈ ller (up to 18%) and Epithemia adnata Ku ̈ tzing (up to 11%). Zone II ranges from 29.4 to 25.2 cm, corresponding to the time interval between 1896 and 1938 AD (samples NSA-3-14 to NSA-3-13). Within this zone, the planktonic ⁄ littoral Synedra acus Ku ̈ tzing is dominant, with a mean abundance of 23%. The planktonic species Aulacoseira ambigua (Grunow) Simonsen and Aulacoseira granulata (Ehrenberg) Simonsen increase rapidly to peak abundances of 38% and 57%, respectively. The littoral and littoral ⁄ epiphytic species decline and reach their minima around 1930 AD. Zone III is the core interval between 25.1 and 0 cm, corresponding to the time interval between c. 1938 and 2007 AD (samples NSA3-12 to NSA-3-1). The diatom assemblage within this zone is characterized by A. ambigua, A. granulata, and S. acus. A more detailed description of each diatom zone and visualization of diatom distribution is given in Stoof-Leichsenring et al. (2011). The morphological diatom diversity of each diatom zone is presented in Table 1. Both diversity indices showed a decrease in
HIDDEN GENETIC DIVERSITY IN KENYAN DIATOMS 1923
Fig. 2 Comparsion between morphological and genetic data from Lake Naivasha sediment core (NSA-3). Relative frequencies of major genera identified by morphological and genetic (rbcL_76) analyses and diatom-inferred zonation. The number of species per genus obtained by morphology and the number of haplotypes assigned to the defined clades of genera (Aulacosiera—Aulacoseira clade A ⁄ B; Navicula—Navicula clade A ⁄ B) are indicated in parentheses. The classification ‘other genera’ comprises species like Epithemia adnata and Gomphonema gracile. Relative frequencies of defined clades are presented for both PCR approaches (rbcL_76 and rbcL_67).
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1924 K. R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING ET AL.
species diversity from the bottom towards the top of the core.
Primer specificity and diversity among amplicons
The in silico PCR analysis showed that the primer pair used to generate the amplicon rbcL_76 was highly specific, with 84% of the identified sequences amplified in silico belonging to diatoms (Table 2). In the in silico PCR, the primers for the shorter fragment, rbcL_67, were less specific, with 33% of identified in silico amplificates being diatoms. As these primers were only used for nested PCRs, this lower specificity did not compromise their suitability for diatom detection (see below). The taxonomic coverage of the primers for rbcL_76 was 75%, while the primers for rbcL_67 amplified 57% of the species in the database. Fragment rbcL_76 could unambiguously assign 75% of all putatively amplified sequences to the species level (74% when only the diatoms sequences were analysed) and rbcL_67 assigned 71% to species level (80% within the diatoms). The established primer pairs successfully amplified the target sequence in several algae cultures listed in Table S1 (Supporting information), and additional cultures, namely, C. pseudostelligera, F. pinnata, N. salinicola, N. amphibia, S. smithii, S. radians and T. weissflogii.
Our data revealed a total of 28 diverse diatom haplotypes across all our sediment core samples (see alignment Fig. S1, Supporting information), defined according to a stringent verification protocol (see Material and methods). An analysis of polymorphic sites, comparing all 28 haplotypes for the 67 bp they all have in common revealed 30 monomorphic and 37 polymorphic sites, of which 29 were parsimony informative. Separate inspection of the 20 haplotypes obtained by the rbcL_76 PCR, revealed 41 monomorphic sites and 35 polymorphic sites, of which 25 were parsimony informative. Using SAP, 14 of the 28 haplotypes (50%) were putatively assigned to species (SAP similarity 92–100%; cf. Material and methods) (Fig. S1; Table S2, Supporting information).
Phylogeny estimation
Not all haplotypes retrieved could be assigned taxonomically with certainty, and we, furthermore, explored phylogenetic relationships between the haplotypes retrieved in this study. A Bayesian analysis of the 28 diatom haplotypes yielded eight major clades (Fig. S2, Supporting information): Aulacoseira clade A (two haplotypes), Aulacoseira clade B (two haplotypes), Synedra clade (four haplotypes), Chaetoceros clade (two haplotypes), Amphora⁄Nitzschia clade (two haplotypes), Navicula
          Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Table 1 Diatom diversity in each diatom zone (core NSA-3) calculated by the Shannon–Weaver (H) diversity index and the diversity index (D). Diversity indices were calculated for morphological and genetic data. Species ⁄ haplotype richness estimations using Chao1 and Ace estimators
Diatom zones Diversity indices
Morph.
rbcL_76 rbcL_67 1.46 1.37
rbcL* 1.78
Morph. rbcL_76 1.59 0.68
rbcL_67 rbcL* 0.80 0.72
H
2.54 1.56 2.08 2.16 0.91 0.66 0.88 0.84
1.73 0.77
D
0.75 0.71 1055 42 51
0.83
0.70 0.50
0.45 0.50
Species ⁄ haplotype richness
Na
Nb
Ace mean
Chao1 mean (95%
1900 139 185 324
30 15 13 22 26
93
10 34 2 5 5
confidence intervals)
30.00 29.99 ⁄ 30.00
23.16 14.00 23 27.00 16.57 ⁄ 57.42 13.07 ⁄ 27.14 21.27 ⁄ 35.36 26.11 ⁄ 34.96
6.02 ⁄ 14.44 7.41 ⁄ 22.07
34.20 NP NP 34 ⁄ 38.07
8.00 5.36 ⁄ 29.38
Zone I (samples NSA-3-15 to 18)
Morph. rbcL_76 rbcL_67 rbcL*
Zone II (samples NSA-3-13 to 14)
Zone III (samples NSA-3-1 to 12)
30.44
31.53 14.05 23.76 28.00
6 7 6.00 13.55 6.50 8.50
21.00
19.00
11.98 ⁄ 75.82
35.31 NP NP
8.00
*Diversity and species richness indices for the combination of results obtained by the rbcL_76 and rbcL_67 approach. NP—calculation of haplotype richness estimation is not possible. Na—total number of diatom counts or clones sequenced; Nb—total number of species ⁄ haplotypes detected.
6619 309
53 362

Table 2 Primer characteristics
HIDDEN GENETIC DIVERSITY IN KENYAN DIATOMS 1925
  Primer specificity Taxonomic Amplicon to diatoms* (%) coverage† (%)
rbcL_76 84 75 rbcL_67 33 57
Taxonomic resolution (among all taxa ⁄ within diatoms)
% assigned % assigned % assigned
to species to genus to family 75⁄74 92⁄94 100⁄100
71⁄80 81⁄92 87⁄89
   *Calculated as the percentage of diatom sequences among all identified in silico amplificates retrieved with these primers. †Calculated as the percentage of amplified diatom species in a database containing diatom sequences of the potentially amplified region.
clade A (three haplotypes), and Navicula clade B (twelve haplotypes) and Cymbella clade (one haplotype) (see Table S2, Supporting information for details).
Haplotypes in the NSA-3 core and comparison with morphological data
Combining results for the rbcL_76 and rbcL_67 PCR reactions, 28 different diatom haplotypes were identified from 18 stratified samples from the Lake Naivasha core (NSA-3, Table S2, Supporting information). Ten haplotypes were identified by both PCRs, in these cases the shorter rbcL_67 haplotypes are identical to the rbcL_76 haplotypes in their overlapping region. However, two haplotypes, Nav 2 ⁄ 4 and Nav rad 1 ⁄ 2, obtained from the rbcL_67 PCR, are identical to more than one rbcL_76 haplotype (i.e., to Nav 2 and Nav 4 in caseofNav2⁄4;andtoNavrad1,Navrad2incaseof Nav rad 1 ⁄ 2). In these cases, the longer haplotypes showed variable sites in the part, which is not covered by the short fragment (see Fig. S1, Supporting information). Ten haplotypes (Amp 1, Aul amb 2, Cha 2, Cha soc 1, Nav 1⁄3⁄5⁄6, Nav rad 3, Tha 1) were only obtained by the rbcL_76 PCR approach, whereas eight haplotypes (Aul ang 2, Cha 3, Cym pro 1, Nit pal 1, Syn rum 1⁄2⁄3⁄4) were only detected by the rbcL_67 PCR approach. The zonation revealed by morphological investigations is also reflected in the distribution of haplotype clades throughout the core: Zone I showed the highest diversity with 22 different haplotypes and was dominated by haplotypes from the Synedra and Navicula clade A ⁄ B (H = 2.16; D = 0.84). In Zone II, which is transitional between Zones I and III, 10 different haplotypes (H = 1.78; D = 0.83) occurred. In this zone, Navicula clade A ⁄ B and Aulacoseira clade A ⁄ B haplotypes were predominant, and the relative amount of Aulacoseira haplotypes increased, whereas Navicula haplotypes gradually disappeared towards Zone III. Zone III was characterized by five different haplotypes (H = 0.72; D = 0.50) and was dominated by the two Aulacoseira haplotypes Aul amb 1 and Aul ang 1. Navicula clade A ⁄ B
haplotypes disappeared completely after 1938 AD (cf. Table S2, Supporting information; Fig. 2). The diversity indices ranged from 2.16 to 0.72 (H) and 0.84 to 0.50 (D) and showed a decrease in haplotype diversity from diatom Zone I towards Zone III. This trend was similar for both PCR approaches (rbcL_76 and rbcL_67) individually and combined. A correlation test between H and D values obtained from the morphological and the combined genetic data (rbcl*) showed a positive correlation (D: r=0.85, P=0.0000; H: r=0.85, P=0.0000) (cf. Table 1).
Species richness estimation for the morphological data indicated that diatom counts per sample cover the actual species richness of the sediment samples (Table 1). In contrast, richness estimations for the haplotype diversity of diatom zones II and III revealed that the clone sequences do not cover the estimated haplotype richness (see Table 1), whereas in diatom Zone I the estimated haplotype richness (Chao1 = 23, Ace = 23.76) corresponds to the number of detected haplotypes (Nb = 22). The number of haplotypes retrieved was not directly correlated with the number of clones sequenced, indicating that the actual DNA diversity in the samples was not uniform throughout the core. For example, 73 clones retrieved from sample NSA-3-1 yielded only three haplotypes, whereas a similar number of clones (76) from sample NSA-3-17 yielded 10 haplotypes. The rarefaction curves (Fig. S4, Supporting information) of the sediment samples NSA3-12 and NSA-3-13 showed still a rising slope at higher clone number suggesting that the detected haplotype diversity is incomplete. As most of the rarefaction curves showed a plateau or a weakly rising slope, we assume that the analysis of additional clones will not increase the number of new haplotypes strongly. Throughout the stratified layers of the NSA-3 core, the distribution and abundance of genetically inferred diatom taxa generally corresponds to the results of the morphological investigation (Fig. 2). A correlation test revealed a highly significant correlation between both data sets (r = 0.83, P = 0.00002).
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1926 K. R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING ET AL.
The information gained from the two data sets was not identical, though, and the genetic analysis revealed some haplotypes assigned to species not detected microscopically, for example Chaetoceros. At the same time, there were also two morphologically highly abundant species in Zone I, G. gracile and E. adnata that did not show up in the genetic analysis. As we only had a reference sequence for one of them (G. gracile, Table S1, Supporting information), the absence of E. adnata DNA is not certain. Similarly, morphological data for Cymbella sp. showed an abundance of up to 40% in Zone I, whereas the genetic detection is rather poor. Only 4 clone sequences (Cym pro) were found in sample NSA3-17 (cf. Table S2, Supporting information and Fig. 2).
The majority of clone sequences were assigned to either Navicula (15 different haplotypes, NTotal = 293 clones) or Aulacoseira (four different haplotypes, NTotal = 413 clones). Comparing this with the morphological data, in which we identified four Aulacoseira sp. species, but only five Navicula sp., suggests a higher genetic diversity in Navicula than represented by morphological analysis. Interestingly, the haplotypes of the Navicula clade B dominant in Zone I and II of the core (dated to the period of about 1820 AD to 1938 AD) were never found in any of the contemporary surface samples (unpublished data).
To resolve the relationships within the Navicula clade B in more detail, we constructed a 95% probability parsimony network. This network indicated two major groups of haplotypes (Fig. 3a). Each group comprised one dominant haplotype (Nav 2 for group 1 and Nav 7
for group 2) and further haplotypes, which were separated by only a single or two mutations from the main haplotype. Plotting the relative frequencies (i.e., number of clones, Table S2, Supporting information) against time revealed a periodic cyclicality in the occurrence of these groups of haplotypes (Fig. 3b) in the time period between 1820 and 1938 AD. A correlation test revealed a positive and significant correlation (r = 0.89, P = 0.03) between East African rainfall anomaly data and Navicula clade B group 1 and group 2 haplotype frequencies (both PCR approaches combined).
Discussion
RbcL as a marker to assess diatom diversity and comparison with morphological data
To our best knowledge, this is the first study using a very short rbcL fragment as a barcoding marker for diatom species identification in lake sediment samples. A recent study (Hamsher et al. 2011) proved rbcL to be suitable for diatom barcoding using a larger fragment size. This marker is, however, well established in plant taxa, where it has been used to identify vascular plants in boluses from extinct ground sloth (Hofreiter et al. 2000) and ancient Abies pollen grains (Suyama et al. 1996). Although COI (cytochrome oxidase I) was found to be more variable, investigations on rbcL in diatoms indicate this plastid marker to be a robust marker for species identification (and thus a potential DNA barcode), which also exhibits intra-specific variation in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fig. 3 Navicula clade B haplotypes: Network and distribution. (a) 95% probability parsimony network for the haplotypes comprised by the Navicula clade B detected in NSA-3 core samples. Pie chart area is scaled by frequency of the respective haplotype (cf. Table S2, Supporting information). (b) Relative frequencies of Navicula clade B group 1 and 2, relative to lake level changes from Crescent Island Crater (CIC, a combination of instrumental and sediment proxy; A ̊ se 1987; Verschuren 2001) and rainfall anomaly for Eastern Africa (EA, data combined from rainfall proxy indicators for the 19th century and instrumental data for the 20th century, from Nicholson 2001).
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

some species (e.g., Sellaphora, Evans et al. 2007). In our study on environmental samples, the rbcL primers always yielded one to six different diatom DNA sequences from pennate as well as centric diatom taxa out of single samples. The primers successfully amplified a variety of diatoms in ecologically diverse habitats, for example from freshwater and saline–alkaline lakes in Kenya (unpublished data) as well as from several freshwater lakes in Siberia (unpublished data). As the marker proposed here is very short and variable, and flanked by conserved priming sites, it is also well suited for environmental barcoding employing nextgeneration sequencing techniques (Valentini et al. 2009).
The genetic survey did not reveal all species identified morphologically. This problem might be overcome by employing a next-generation amplicon sequencing approach, but in genetic analysis of environmental samples, the composition of PCR products and sequences will not fully reflect the number of individual organisms from which the DNA is derived. Isolation, PCR and cloning procedure indecisively filter the genetic results (Jahn et al. 2007). Importantly, the amount of rbcL DNA is determined by the number of chloroplasts per cell and the number of genomes per chloroplast. The number of chloroplasts vastly varies across diatoms from a few (1–2) to many (Tsuyoshi & Tamotsu 2006). Species-specific differences in the amount of chloroplast DNA in the core may, therefore, account for quantitative differences between the genetic and morphological survey. In addition, template DNA amount might possibly also be determined by interspecies differences in lysis efficiency during DNA extraction. Furthermore, the amplification reaction is strongly influenced by primer specificity and their taxonomic coverage (Bellemain et al. 2010).
In our study, the genetic information and morphological data are highly correlated, but not fully identical. With regard to taxonomic resolution, they seem complementary: morphological analysis appears the more exhaustive method to yield the full variability, while genetic rbcL analysis appears more sensitive to detect subtle differences in diatom diversity. With regard to dominant species, however, both analyses yield comparable results. Here, the genetic techniques provide a quick, sensitive and reliable analytical tool.
Temporal variation in diatom occurrence at Lake Naivasha
Both morphological and genetic data from the Lake Naivasha sediment core generally reveal the same trend and turnover in diatom assemblages throughout the entire core, changing from epiphytic ⁄ littoral (e.g. Navi-
cula) types in Zones I and II to predominant planktonic Aulacoseira assemblages in Zones II and III (Fig. S2, Supporting information). Both PCR approaches tend to reveal a higher number of diverse diatom haplotypes in Zone I and II, whereas Zone III was dominated almost solely by Aulacoseira haplotypes. This is also reflected in decreasing diversity indices from the bottom towards the top of the NSA-3 core, both for the morphological and genetic data (Table 1). The genetic survey did not reveal all species identified morphologically. The sequencing effort (clone number per sample) is probably too low to detect the entire species richness of the core samples, although most of the rarefaction curves showed saturation. The direct comparison with the morphological data indicates that there are more species, but sample-based differences in DNA composition and PCR-bias have an influence on detection of genetic diversity.
Within Zone I and II, Navicula was the by far most abundant taxon in the genetic analysis, while it was completely absent in Zone III. The Navicula clade B comprised several different haplotypes closely related to each other, dominating the NSA-3 core in Zones I and II (Figs 2 and 3a). There are two major lineages (group 1 and group 2) within this Navicula clade B which exhibit a periodic cyclicality in relative frequencies. This cyclicality seems to coincide with climatic variation during the time period from 1820 to 1938 AD (i.e., the time of diatom Zones I and II). This period is characterized by substantial lake level changes at Crescent Island Crater (Verschuren 2001) and rainfall anomalies for Eastern Africa (Nicholson 2001). Both records indicate alternating dry and wet periods during that time. In line with these alternating periods, the relative frequency of Navicula group 1 increased during dry periods, whereas the relative frequency of Navicula group 2 decreased at the same time. During wet periods, the relative number of haplotypes of group 2 increased. After 1938 AD, all haplotypes belonging to the Navicula clade B disappeared completely. At the same time, Navicula clade A haplotypes decreased, and the total diatom community was replaced by Aulacoseira species after 1938 AD towards the top of the core. This major floral shift was presumably due to environmental changes induced by increasing human impact, resulting in the increased nutrient and sediment input into Lake Naivasha, that led to eutrophic conditions favoring Aulacoseira species (Anderson et al. 1990; Karst and Smol 1998; Kilham et al. 1986). In the morphological analysis, Navicula species were also detected, but other (genetically not detected) species were more abundant, like Gomphonema sp. or Epithemia sp. These discrepancies might be attributed to possible differences in the amount of chloroplast DNA in the different species. Further, the genetic
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
HIDDEN
GENETIC DIVERSITY IN KENYAN DIATOMS 1927

1928 K. R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING ET AL.
analysis revealed haplotypes with no correlates in the morphological investigations corresponding to diatoms from the family of Chaetocerotaceae. Species from this family, which are usually predominant in marine waters, are known to rarely occur in saline and alkaline lakes in East Africa with moderate to high conductivities (Gasse 1986). In our study, they were almost only present in core sample NSA-3-16, which had the highest conductivity (see details in Stoof-Leichsenring et al. 2011). Interestingly, DNA of Chaetoceros is among the diatom DNA most commonly retrieved from sediment cores (Coolen et al. 2004, 2007) possibly owing to a particularly high DNA content. The planktonic Aulacoseira sp. is microscopically and genetically rarely found in Zone I compared with Zone III. The Aulacoseira haplotypes detected in this period (Aul amb 2 and Aul ang 2) differ from those haplotypes predominant in Zone III (Aul amb 1 and Aul ang 1), by four and two mutational steps, respectively. This putatively suggests temporal intra-specific variation in both Aulacoseira species’ populations over the last 200 years. The morphological survey indicated that Aulacoseira species account for ca. Ninety percentage of all diatoms detected in Zone III. The subdominant genus was Synedra, which was only represented by one clone in sample NSA-3-1. In the light of the high number of Aulacoseira species, it is probably that other haplotypes are underrepresented, because of a bias towards PCR amplification of the most abundant diatom DNA. Further, Aulacoseira species are able to form resting stages (Round et al. 1990), which might support DNA preservation in historical samples. In addition, diatoms of the genus Aulacoseira, belonging to the group of centric diatoms, have many chloroplasts and therefore a high gene copy number (Tsuyoshi & Tamotsu 2006). Interestingly, we observed no haplotype variation within Aulcoseira species in Zone III, representing a time period of almost 70 years, while there were haplotype changes in Aulcoseira sp. across zones I to III (see above). In contrast, Synedra haplotypes (Syn rum 1-4), which are distributed across different zones, are up to eight mutational steps apart from each other, indicating that these types might belong to different Synedra species. This was supported by the fact that five Synedra species were found morphologically throughout the core.
In summary, we show that the short rbcL gene fragment is a specific and sensitive marker to detect interand intra-specific variation in diatoms from tropical lake sediments. The marker was successfully used to unravel temporal variation in diatom species composition within a sediment core, taken from the tropical freshwater Lake Naivasha. The comparison between morphological and genetic diatom data revealed a good correlation with regard to dominant diatom species and
major turnovers, indicating that diatom DNA is stratified in continuous core samples. The amount of preserved diatom DNA in the sediment might vary across species, probably depending on the number of chloroplast gene copies and the existence of resting stages. While morphological investigations appear more exhaustive at and above the species level, genetics unraveled morphologically undetected cryptic lineages, which might constitute cryptic species. On top of the major turnover from epiphytic ⁄ littoral Navicula types to planktonic Aulacoseira type, also determined by morphological investigations, the genetic analysis revealed intrinsic periodical cyclicality in frequencies of two groups of Navicula haplotypes. This alteration in frequency is correlated with pronounced wet and dry periods between 1820 and 1938 AD. Hence, genetic data from lake sediments are informative and potentially helpful to track hidden biodiversity and to assess its correlation with environmental change.
Acknowledgements
This project was performed within the Graduate School’s GRK 1364 ‘Shaping Earth’s Surface in a Variable Environment’, funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). We are grateful to the Government of Kenya (Research Permits MOST13⁄001⁄30C 59⁄10, 59⁄18 and 59⁄22) and the University of Nairobi for research permits and support. We also thank Yannick Garcin and Annett Junginger for field support and Erik Sperfeld for assistance with the cultivation of algae cultures. We are grateful to Peter Appleby, University of Liverpool, for the 210Pb dating. We would also like to thank the Norwegian Metacenter for Computational Science (Notur) for providing computational infrastructure.
References
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1930 K. R. STOOF-LEICHSENRING ET AL.
Data accessibility
DNA sequences retrieved from the sediment samples (environmental diatom sequences 1–28) are deposited in the Dryad repository doi: 10.5061/dryad.t7142b79. DNA Sequences retrieved from single algae cultures see Table S3 (Supporting information) for GenBank accession numbers.
K.S.-L. and L.E. are interested in using recent and ancient environmental DNA, particularly from sediments and soils, to analyse processes shaping biodiversity on different timescales. M.T. is an expert in palaeoclimate research of lower latitudes with special emphasis on the impact of environmental changes to the biosphere. R.T. is interested in molecular evolution and systematics of various taxa using molecular and morphological techniques.
Supporting information
Table S1 Diatom species identified morphologically and its taxonomic group as well as genetic information on rbcL DNA reference sequences for each detected species.
Table S2 Haplotypes obtained from the NSA-3 core using rbcl_76 and rbcL_67 PCR.
Table S3 Genbank accession numbers of DNA sequences retrieved from single algae cultures.
Fig. S1 Parallel short cores NSA-3⁄4. Picture, 210Pb ages and lithological description of the different sediment layers.
Fig. S2 Alignment of haplotypes.
Fig. S3 Baysian phylogenetic tree for the 28 verified haplotypes
and the outgroup Bolidomonas pacifica.
Fig. S4 Rarefaction curves.
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
  Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
