   Molecular Ecology (2012) 21, 1115–1129 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05434.x
Islands and streams: clusters and gene flow in wild barley populations from the Levant
SARIEL HU ̈ BNER,* TORSTEN GU ̈ NTHER,† ANDREW FLAVELL,‡ EYAL FRIDMAN,§ ANDREAS GRANER,– ABRAHAM KOROL* and KARL J. SCHMID†
*Department of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Mt. Carmel, Haifa 31905, Israel, †Institute of Plant Breeding, Seed Science and Population Genetics, University of Hohenheim, D-70593 Stuttgart, Germany, ‡Division of Plant Sciences, University of Dundee at SCRI, Invergowrie, Dundee 5DA, UK, §The R.H Smith Institute of Plant Science and Genetics in Agriculture, The R.H Smith Faculty of Agriculture, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel, –Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK), Corrensstr. 3, 06466 Gatersleben, Germany
Abstract
The domestication of plants frequently results in a high level of genetic differentiation between domesticated plants and their wild progenitors. This process is counteracted by gene flow between wild and domesticated plants because they are usually able to intermate and to exchange genes. We investigated the extent of gene flow between wild barley Hordeum spontaneum and cultivated barley Hordeum vulgare, and its effect on population structure in wild barley by analysing a collection of 896 wild barley accessions (Barley1K) from Israel and all available Israeli H. vulgare accessions from the Israeli gene bank. We compared the performance of simple sequence repeats (SSR) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) marker data genotyped over a core collection in estimating population parameters. Estimates of gene flow rates with SSR markers indicated a high level of introgression from cultivated barley into wild barley. After removing accessions from the wild barley sample that were recently admixed with cultivated barley, the inference of population structure improved significantly. Both SSR and SNP markers showed that the genetic population structure of wild barley in Israel corresponds to the three major ecogeographic regions: the coast, the Mediterranean north and the deserts in the Jordan valley and the South. Gene flow rates were estimated to be higher from north to south than in the opposite direction. As has been observed in other crop species, there is a significant exchange of alleles between the wild species and domesticated varieties that needs to be accounted for in the population genetic analysis of domestication.
Keywords: barley, domestication, gene flow, Hordeum spontaneum, population structure Received 27 March 2011; revision received 28 November 2011; accepted 1 December 2011
Introduction
Modern crop plants have originated from wild ancestors by artificial selection of desirable traits for cultivation and nutrition (Salamini et al. 2002). Cultivated barley (Hordeum vulgare) is one of the first domesticated crop plants in human agricultural history (Zohary & Hopf 2000) and is considered one of the most important crop plants in the world, as it ranks fourth in cereals
Correspondence: Karl J. Schmid, Fax: +49 711 459 24458; E-mail: karl.schmid@uni-hohenheim.de
cultivated worldwide (FAO—http://faostat.fao.org). The exact location of its domestication along the Fertile Crescent is still unknown because contradicting findings continue to kindle the debate among population geneticists and archaeobotanists (Abbo et al. 2001; Kilian et al. 2006; Morrell & Clegg 2007; Jones et al. 2008). Wild barley, Hordeum spontaneum, which is the ancestor of cultivated barley, occurs in the Fertile Crescent and beyond (Harlan & Zohary 1966) and can be found in ecologically highly diverse environments. Since its domestication about 10 000 years ago, cultivated barley evolved into a genetically and morphologically differentiated
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1116 S. HU ̈ BNER ET AL.
subspecies (Badr et al. 2000; E. Bdolach, S. Ein-Gedi, S. Hu ̈bner & E. Fridman, unpublished). Nevertheless, cultivated and wild barley have been growing in close proximity within their shared distribution range, and because no breeding barriers are known, gene flow between cultivated and wild barley is expected, particularly in the Fertile Crescent region (Nevo 1998).
Barley is widely used as a model plant in the study of genetics, evolution and the domestication of cereals because of its diploid genome, high level of genetic variation and the availability of large germplasm collections in gene banks. Continuous selection over thousands of years led to a strong erosion in allelic variation of cultivated barley (Nevo 1992), and natural populations of wild ancestors are considered as sources to introduce new and useful genetic variation into modern barley breeding populations (Ellis et al. 2000). Although wild barley is a predominately self-fertilizing species with an estimated outcrossing rate of <2% (AbdelGhani et al. 2004), lower levels of linkage disequilibrium than expected for a self-fertilizing species were found (Morrell et al. 2005). Moreover, a high level of genetic variation and an extensive geographic population structure were observed in wild barley populations from different parts of the Fertile Crescent. These features make wild barley an attractive source for valuable genetic variation and a resource for genetic mapping of quantitative traits (Nevo et al. 1979; Ellis et al. 2000; Chen et al. 2009).
Gene flow between wild and domesticated crops is a widespread phenomenon and can have profound consequences on genetic diversity, particularly in wild relatives (Ellstrand 2001). Possible consequences include the introgression of deleterious alleles that may reduce local fitness, or of advantageous alleles that increase the weediness and the ecological range of wild relatives (Allainguillaume et al. 2009). Both introgression (via pollen) and migration (via seeds) are expected in barley and are jointly referred to as gene flow in this study. Even at low rates, gene flow reduces the extent of genetic differentiation between populations (Wright 1943) and may prevent the emergence of new species (Turner et al. 1982; Morjan & Rieseberg 2004). Both gene flow rates and population structure are highly affected by the mating system of the species, the physical environment (e.g. mountain ranges) and environmental factors imposing its adaptation. In addition, effects of genetic drift are expected to be stronger in self-fertilizing species than in outcrossing species, thereby contributing to an increased level of genetic population structure (Wright 1965). Morrell et al. (2003) showed that wild barley alleles can migrate over large geographic distances (􏰁3500 km; Afghanistan–Israel) at higher rates than expected for predominantly self-fertilizing species. However, little is
known about gene flow rates of wild barley over short geographic distances and about the incidence of historical and ongoing gene flow from cultivated into wild barley. Considering that both breeding system and localized seed dispersal result in reduced rates of gene flow (Volis et al. 2010), it is expected that gene flow between cultivated and wild barley, and among wild barley populations, is rare.
The analysis of genetic variation is influenced by the type of genetic markers used because they differ in their mutation rates and pattern, depth in time, availability and information content and, therefore, may affect the interpretation of results (Nybom 2004; Schlo ̈tterer 2004). Microsatellites (simple sequence repeats, SSR) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are extensively used in population genetic studies. The main differences between these two-marker systems are the average number of alleles per marker (information content) and mutation models, which must be considered when choosing the number of markers to use in a survey of genetic variation (Hamblin et al. 2007). SSRs are often considered to be neutral markers although they may violate this assumption if they were developed from expressed sequence tags (ESTs; Kantanen et al. 2000). In addition, their hypervariability that is caused by a high mutation rate (􏰁10)4) may lead to homoplasy and an incorrect estimation of genetic differences between accessions or populations (Estoup et al. 2002). On the other hand, the usability of SNP is frequently confounded by an ascertainment bias if they were identified in a small panel of accessions that do not represent the full genetic variation of a species (Nielsen 2003; Moragues et al. 2010). In contrast to SSRs, the bi-allelic nature of SNPs, their low mutation rates (􏰁10)8) and their sensitivity to the ascertainment procedure may lead to an underestimation of genetic distances and an incorrect inference of recent demographic events (Morin 2004).
In this study, we investigate the effects of gene flow and genetic marker type on the inference of population parameters and population structure of wild barley in the Levant, by estimating (i) the rates and direction of gene flow between wild and cultivated barley and between natural populations of wild barley, (ii) the effect of genetic marker type on population parameter estimates and (iii) the effect of immigrants on the inference of population structure. These questions are of interest in the context of wild plant adaptation and the utilization of wild plants as genetic resources for plant breeding (Ellis et al. 2000) because the introduction of exotic germplasm by markerassisted selection or other methods is a possible approach to broaden the genetic basis of modern elite germplasm (Zamir 2001).
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

GENE FLOW
Using both SSR and SNP markers, we detected historical and recent gene flow between wild and cultivated barley as well as within wild barley populations and found that it has an effect on population structure and on our ability to unravel it. In addition, the geographic population structure in the Levant is described for wild barley.
Materials and methods
Plant samples and genotyping
During spring 2007, a comprehensive wild barley germplasm collection from Israel was established (Hu ̈bner et al. 2009). This collection, named Barley1K, is composed of 896 accessions from 51 different sampling sites, representing the wide ecogeographical variation of barley in the Levant. A hierarchical sampling mode was used to sample one spike from each of four different plants representing each of five microsites in each of the 51 sampling sites. This collection was genotyped with 42 SSRs (Hu ̈bner et al. 2009), and the data were also used in this study. In addition, 65 accessions from a worldwide cultivated barley collection, available from the Israeli Plant Gene Bank (IGB; Agriculture Research Organization, Beit Dagan, Israel), were selected as representatives of the cultivated barley (Table S1, Supporting information). A single seed of each accession was germinated in planting trays in the fall of 2007, and DNA was extracted from the second leaf of each accession. Genotyping was performed using 42 EST-derived microsatellite markers (EST-SSR) representing all seven chromosomes (Thiel et al. 2003). For further genotyping with the BOPA1 Illumina GoldenGate chip (Rostoks et al. 2005), Barley1K was reduced to a core collection consisting of 250 accessions representing each microsite within each of the 51 sampling locations. These accessions were assigned to genetic clusters using STRUCTURE v2.1 (Pritchard et al. 2000), and accessions with the highest assignment coefficient were selected. Although this criterion may lead to an underestimation of gene flow rates, we used it to ensure that the best representatives of each microsite were selected rather than accessions of unknown origin. A single seed of each spike was germinated, and genomic DNA was extracted from 100 to 300 mg of young seedling leaves. Concentration of DNA samples was checked, adjusted and standardized to 80 ng ⁄ lL in a TE buffer. Genotyping with the GoldenGate platform was performed as described previously (Close et al. 2009). After excluding accessions that were of known cultivated origin, which had a high proportion of missing data (>20%) or were not propagated, 215 accessions of the Barley1K collection were retained as a representative core collection.
AND GENETIC CLUSTERS IN WILD BARLEY 1117 Data analysis and statistics
Descriptive statistics were calculated in PowerMarker (Liu & Muse 2005) and R v.2.9.2 basic, stats (The R Foundation for statistical computing), and ade4 (Dray & Dufour 2007) packages for both SNP and SSR data sets of the Barley1K core collection. The following parameters were calculated: average allele frequency over all markers, average number of alleles per locus, availability (defined as: 1—proportion of missing data), gene diversity (Weir 1996), observed heterozygosity, polymorphism information content (PIC) for all loci (Botstein et al. 1980) and the allele frequency distribution. In addition, pairwise genetic distances were calculated from the proportion of shared alleles between accessions, and the Mantel test (Mantel 1967) was performed between distance matrices.
Accessions with recent gene flow between wild and cultivated barley were detected using the software STRUCTURE based on microsatellites genotyped in the complete Barley1K and cultivated barley (IGB) collections. Accessions with a lower assignment coefficient than expected from their origin were considered as immigrants. The model included prior population information by indexing each genetic group with different integers representing the wild Barley1K collection or the cultivated IGB collection. The model was run with different probabilities (0.001 £ m £ 0.1) that individuals in the data sets are immigrants and different numbers of plausible generations back (G) until the immigrating ancestor. Allele frequencies across clusters (F model) were set to be correlated (Falush et al. 2003), and the burn-in period was set to 200 000 iterations, followed by 100 000 iterations for sampling of the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) procedure. For the inference of the population structure, the nonadmixture model without prior population assignment information for both SSR and SNP data sets was used. Previous work indicated that the Barley1K collection can be represented by three and seven different clusters (Hu ̈bner et al. 2009). Therefore, STRUCTURE was run for K values ranging from 2 to 7, and the results were compared with the clusteredness statistic (Rosenberg et al. 2005) by calculating the overall mean assignment value of an individual to a single cluster in five independent runs for each K. Clusteredness measures the probability to randomly sample an individual that is perfectly assigned to a cluster, and the value of K with the highest overall clusteredness measure is considered to be the best value for describing the number of clusters in the sample. We used the clusteredness statistics to infer population structure because the ad hoc approach proposed by Pritchard was not informative for identifying
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1118 S. HU ̈ BNER ET AL.
the most appropriate number of clusters in our data set because of an approximately linear increase in ln P(K|X). Further investigation of the spatial distribution of the genetic clusters was conducted with BAPS V5.3 (Corander et al. 2003) for the wild barley core collection using both SSR and SNP data sets.
GPS coordinates (Universal Transverse Mercator coordinates, UTM grid) recorded during sampling were used for geolocation of accessions (see Hu ̈bner et al. 2009). For each data set, the results were summarized over five replicates, and the maximum number of clusters in the data sets was set to three. Spatial clustering in BAPS used the GPS coordinates of accessions and grid lines to calculate sample domains for producing a Voronoi tessellation of all accessions in the given coordinate space. The Voronoi tessellation can then be combined with the cluster assignment by colouring the tesselation domain of each accession according to its assignment to a genetic cluster (Corander et al. 2008).
Gene flow and effective population size of cultivated and wild barley were estimated with MIGRATE 3.1.4 (Beerli & Felsenstein 2001). MIGRATE estimates h (4Nel) and gene flow rates (4Nem) from genetic data using an extension of the coalescent theory. The analysis included a Brownian motion model and a Bayesian inference strategy (Beerli & Felsenstein 2001). A slice sampling MCMC algorithm (Neal 2003) was set to generate the posterior distribution using a single long chain of 100 000 sampling parameter values summarized over five replicates. The prior distribution of h was set to be uniform between 0 and 10, which we considered a plausible range after running MIGRATE for various parameter settings. To ensure the sampling of the MCMC over more genealogies, a Markov Coupling (MCMCMC) procedure (Geyer & Thompson 1995) was used with an adaptive ‘heating’ scheme of four independent chains with distinct temperatures in each analysis. Estimates were computed for each locus and summarized as weighted values over all loci. Estimation of gene flow rates and population parameters within wild barley was conducted with MIGRATE using the same model and sampling strategy settings. Accessions were assigned to clusters based on their geographic location and the overall assignment value (q) of accessions from the same sampling site. This assignment criterion was used to avoid a bias introduced by analysing gene flow among clusters with the lowest level of predefined gene flow (Waples & Gaggiotti 2006).
Demographic models (Appendix S1, Supporting information) were compared by an approximate Bayesian computation method (ABC) using a rejection step (Pritchard et al. 1999), followed by a regression algo-
rithm (Beaumont et al. 2002). This method enables the estimation of population parameters and a comparison of alternative demographic models without evaluating the likelihood function analytically. Microsatellite data were simulated 100 000 times in the program popABC (Lopes et al. 2009) with the coalescence approach using the stepwise mutation model with the varying mutation rate measured as the number of mutations per generation per locus. For each model, prior population parameters were used, and 1000 simulations whose summary statistics was within d distance (d < 0.05) from the real data summary statistics based on the same set of statistics were accepted in the rejection step. We tested the isolation-with-migration (IM) model (Nielsen & Wakeley 2001) against the alternative shared variants (SV) model using a broad range of parameter priors and a hierarchical approach (Storz & Beaumont 2002) to account for variation in mutation rates among the 42 simulated SSR loci. Summary statistics used for the Bayesian framework included variance in allele length, number of alleles and Shannon’s index. Coalescence simulations and rejection steps were computed with the popABC program. The regression step was performed in R using scripts by M. Beaumont (http://code.google.com/p/popabc/ model_choice.r) and additional scripts from the popABC package that were modified to fit our analyses. Priors of population parameters were uniform distributions bound between minimum and maximum values (Table 1) with or without gene flow.
To investigate the effect of ascertainment bias of the BOPA1 SNPs on the allele frequency distribution of the 215 wild accessions (Appendix S1, Supporting information), coalescence simulations were performed with the ms program (Hudson 2002). Samples were generated under a neutral model of domestication that includes a single domestication event about 10 000 generations ago, which led to the origin of cultivated barley from wild barley (Innan & Kim 2004). Parameter estimates for h and gene flow rates between them were set according to MIGRATE results for the wild Barley1K collection and the cultivated IGB collection. A mutation rate of 10)8 mutations per site per generation (Ossowski et al. 2010) was assumed, and the sample size for the wild collection was set to 215 accessions. The cultivated barley sample included a panel of eight accessions from which the SNPs were ascertained as in the construction of the BOPA1 genotyping array (Rostoks et al. 2005). These SNPs were then used to calculate population parameters in the simulated wild barley sample. By simulating the model 1000 times, allele frequency distributions were produced and used to compare the different models using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (Young 1977).
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

GENE FLOW AND GENETIC CLUSTERS IN WILD BARLEY 1119
Table 1 Population parameter descriptions and prior distributions used in the approximate Bayesian computation approach for comparison between alternative demographic models
   Parameter
Te Wild-cultivated
Ne Wild
Ne Cultivated M Wild
M Cultivated
Te1
Te2
Ne Desert
Ne Coast
Ne North
Mig Desert Mig Coast Mig North Microsatellites
Description
Time since the divergence of wild and cultivated barley
Wild barley effective population size Cultivated barley effective population size Proportion of immigrants (m)
Proportion of immigrants (m)
First split event
Second split event
Desert effective population size Coast effective population size North effective population size Proportion of immigrants (m) Proportion of immigrants (m) Proportion of immigrants (m) Mutation rate and variation
Prior distributions ‘Isolation with migration’
Uniform(7000, 14000)
Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0.001, 0.0001) Uniform(0.001, 0.0001)
Uniform(1000, 100000) Uniform(1000, 100000) Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0.001, 0.0001) Uniform(0.001, 0.0001) Uniform(0.001, 0.0001) LogNormal(10)4, 0.5)
Prior distributions
‘Shared variants’
0
Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0, 10000) 0
0
0
0
Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0, 10000) Uniform(0, 10000)
0
0
0
LogNormal(10)4, 0.5)
    Te is measured in generations; M is proportion of immigrants divided by the effective population size (Ne). Upper part of the table refers to Isolation–Migration vs. shared variants models for wild and cultivated barley. Lower part of the table refers to Isolation– Migration vs. shared variants models between the Barley1K clusters.
Results
Patterns of genetic variation of SSR and SNP markers
The comparison of SNP and SSR markers was based on 42 EST-SSR markers and 1536 genome-wide SNPs of the BOPA1 array for a core collection of 215 wild accessions. SNP markers without variation and a high proportion of missing data (>50%) in wild barley were excluded from further analysis, and after this filtering step, 1137 SNPs were used. A summary of the observed diversity statistics (averages) is shown in Table 2. The level of polymorphism was found to be higher in the SSR than in the SNP data for all diversity measurements used in this study. According to Laval et al. (2002), k ) 1 times more bi-allelic markers should be used to obtain the same level of accuracy in predicting genetic distances as with SSRs, where k is the mean number of alleles per SSR marker. The mean number of
SSR alleles (k) was 9, which indicates that three times more bi-allelic SNP markers (1137) than recommended (378) were used. The mean genetic distance as calculated from the proportion of shared alleles between individuals was found to be higher in the SSR than in the SNP data (SNP = 0.21; SSR = 0.65) although pairwise distances in both data sets are significantly correlated (Mantel test: R = 0.48, P < 0.001; Fig. 1). In addition, because of the bi-allelic nature of SNP markers, we observed a smaller proportion of rare alleles in the frequency distribution in the SNP than in the SSR data (Fig. 2), which may be responsible for different results between marker types in levels of genetic diversity, genetic distances and population structure.
Detection of recent gene flow
Recent gene flow can be estimated from genetic data by identifying the proportion of the genome originating
Table 2 Summary statistics of the Barley1K core collection based on SSR and the BOPA1 SNP data set. Estimates are indicated as averages ± SD
 Number Sample of markers size
SSR 42 215 SNP 1137 215
Major allele frequency
0.48 ± 0.03 0.83 ± 0.004
Gene diversity
0.65 ± 0.025 0.34 ± 0.008
Number of alleles
9.41 ± 0.76 2
Availability
0.89 ± 0.02 0.98 ± 0.001
Heterozygosity
0.02 ± 0.002 0
Polymorphism information content
0.62 ± 0.02 0.20 ± 0.004
  SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; SSR, simple sequence repeat. Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 1120 S. HU ̈ BNER ET AL.
Fig. 1 Comparison of pairwise genetic distances based on the proportion of shared alleles between individuals of the Barley1K core collection. Distances between accessions as obtained by microsatellites (simple sequence repeat) and BOPA1 single nucleotide polymorphism.
found for m = 0.01. Fixing m and extending the number of generations back (G > 2) increased the differences between runs because of loss of detection power of STRUCTURE (Pritchard et al. 2000). Accessions were considered to be immigrants if the assignment coefficient to their expected origin was lower than 0.5. Using this criterion, 12 accessions were classified as immigrants or descendants of immigrants from cultivated barley into wild barley. Most of them (9) originated from a southern sampling site, Yeruham (B1K-02), but immigration was evident in other sampling locations regardless of their geographic region. Although an additional three wild accessions did not cross the 0.5 assignment coefficient threshold, they were not strongly (q < 0.9) assigned to their expected origin, which may indicate either gene flow further back in the past or the presence of rare alleles. In addition, one accession in cultivated barley was classified as wild barley that may have resulted from a contamination in the IGB collection.
To investigate the effect of admixed accessions on population structure inference, we analysed differences in the clusteredness statistics with and without including the 12 accessions classified as immigrants (Fig. 4). This filtering step improved the clusteredness signal in the SSR data, and to a lesser degree in the SNP data, but with both marker types, we obtained three genetic clusters for wild barley. Pairwise allele frequency divergence estimates (Kullback & Leibler 1951) among the three clusters were obtained from STRUCTURE runs with K = 3 (Table 3), and they indicate that SSRs differentiate between populations better than SNP markers. The spatial distribution of wild barley was further analysed with a Voronoi tessellation as implemented in the BAPS program using the GIS coordinates of sampling locations (Fig. 5). With both data sets, the three genetic clusters showed a very similar geographic distribution that corresponded to the three major ecogeographic regions of the Levant: desert, coast and Mediterranean north. As a notable exception, accessions from the Mt. Harif location in the south (B1K-33) were assigned to the northern cluster instead of to the expected desert cluster. The tesselation diagrams for both marker types are remarkably similar, but they differ in contact regions where gene flow is expected to occur. This is especially noticed in the northern part of the Jordan Valley, where a mixture of the three clusters and increased levels of genetic variation were previously reported (Nevo 2006).
Historical gene flow patterns
Although STRUCTURE is very efficient in assigning individuals to genetic clusters, it fails to detect historical gene flow events (Pritchard et al. 2000). The detection power of gene flow in past generations is dramatically
Fig. 2 Allele frequency distributions of the Barley1K core collection from simple sequence repeats (black) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (grey).
from a different population (Pool & Nielsen 2009). STRUCTURE allows the detection of misclassified individuals by their assignment coefficients (q) to distinct populations. The prior population information model of STRUCTURE and the SSR data were used to detect recent immigrants between cultivated and wild barley in the whole Barley1K collection (Fig. 3). Each individual was marked with an integer according to the expected origin (wild⁄cultivated). Various gene flow probabilities (m) and number of generations back in time (G) were investigated. Fixing the number of past generations with gene flow to two (G = 2) enabled us to explore various probability values for gene flow (0.001 £ m £ 0.1) until the smallest substantial differences between runs in significantly detected immigrants were
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 (B) (C)
GENE FLOW AND GENETIC CLUSTERS IN WILD BARLEY 1121
Fig. 3 Recent immigrants detected by STRUCTURE between the wild Barley1K collection and the cultivated Israeli Plant Gene Bank collection. Each column represents one accession, colours indicate distinct clusters, and solid line separates the wild from cultivated barley. The assignment level to the expected cluster is indicated by the relative proportion of the assignment coefficient colour. Number of generations back (G) for detection of an immigrant was set to two for all runs, and different detection probabilities (m) are presented.
(A)
Fig. 4 Inference of wild barley population structure based on clusteredness before (triangle) and after (square) exclusion of immigrants originated from cultivated barley in three data sets: (A) the whole Barley1K collection based on simple sequence repeats (SSRs); (B) the Barley1K core collection based on SSRs; (C) the Barley1K core collection based on the BOPA1 single nucleotide polymorphisms.
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1122 S. HU ̈ BNER ET AL.
Table 3 Population divergence statistics (Kullback-Leibler distance) for the Barley1K core collection (n = 215) as was obtained from STRUCTURE between the three clusters for the simple sequence repeat (lower matrix) and the BOPA1 single nucleotide polymorphism data sets (upper matrix)
loci, but they were consistent in estimating the relative diversity of each cluster and its spatial distribution. The population diversity parameter h, obtained from the SSR data, is significantly higher in the northern population than in the coastal and desert populations (Table 5), which is consistent with the observation that wild barley occurs in much larger stands in the north than in the coastal and desert regions. The MIGRATE results further suggest a higher net gene flow from the northern to the coastal and desert populations along two major paths. One direction of gene flow is from the northern population through the Jordan Valley into the desert, and the second direction is from the northern populations through the coastal region and ends in the semi-arid region. Relatively low rates of gene flow were found between the coastal and the desert regions, which may result from the physical barrier of the mountain ridge along Judah and Samaria.
Because the MIGRATE analysis suggested an isolationwith-migration model (IM), we compared this model with the alternative shared variants model (SV), in which the two populations are essentially a single population or diverged recently using an approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) approach. The prior parameters are given in Table 1, and the posterior distributions for both wild vs. cultivated and within wild barley are shown in Table 6. The SSR data were compared with simulations of each of the two models tested. The IM model was found to fit the real data better than the shared variants model for both wildcultivated and among wild populations models because a higher proportion of the simulations were accepted in the rejection step (IM: 0.59, SV: 0.41) and within wild
 Desert Coast North
* 0.13
0.69 * 0.10 0.60 0.57 *
Desert Coast North
 reduced as the number of generations back is increased and the divergence between populations is decreased (Rannala & Mountain 1997). Therefore, the program MIGRATE was used to investigate patterns of gene flow between cultivated and wild barley, and within wild barley (Fig. 6A, B). Rates of gene flow and effective population size were jointly estimated under each model. As expected, the estimate of h was significantly higher for wild barley than for cultivated barley (SSR data; Table 4). Sporadic gene flow events were identified throughout the history of wild and cultivated barley; however, large differences among loci were noticed. Effective gene flow is expected to be found only among wild barley populations although it may occur in both directions because cultivated barley is repeatedly obtained from commercial companies every year. Therefore, the gene flow rates estimated by MIGRATE indicate gene flow only from cultivated into wild barley (Fig. 6A; Table 4). It should be noted that MIGRATE produces symmetric migration rates in models with two populations (wild vs. cultivated barley).
Estimated parameters of gene flow and diversity for the three clusters of wild barley varied among SSR
0.12
  (A) (B)
Fig. 5 Spatial distribution of three clusters based on GPS recordings for each microsite coordinate [Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) grid] as was obtained from BAPS for the BOPA1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (A) and the simple sequence repeats (B). Each accession is marked in a different colour according to assignment to its corresponding cluster: Green-North; Red-Coast; BlueDesert.
                Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

GENE FLOW AND GENETIC CLUSTERS IN WILD BARLEY 1123
 (A) (B)
                 Fig. 6 Gene flow and effective population size estimates as were obtained from MIGRATE for simple sequence repeats, between wild and cultivated barley (A) and wild barley clusters (B).
Table 4 Population parameters estimates of the wild Barley1K and cultivated Israeli Plant Gene Bank (IGB) collections based on analysis of the simple sequence repeat data with MIGRATE; the 95% confidence intervals are shown in brackets
Effective
Sample population Immigration
populations (IM: 0.88; SV: 0.12). Population parameter estimates in the ABC framework were within the boundaries of MIGRATE and STRUCTURE results (Table 6; Figs S1 and S2, Supporting information). Gene flow was found to occur mostly from cultivated into wild barley, and the estimated divergence time between wild and cultivated barley was larger than the present estimates for domestication although the confidence intervals of posterior parameter estimates are very large (Table 6). In addition to the demographic model parameters, popABC also estimates the topology of the population tree, that is, the relationship among populations. All three possible topologies had similar posterior probabilities [(north, coast), desert]: 0.32; [(north, desert), coast]: 0.34, [(desert, coast), north]: 0.34) suggesting that they are equally distant from each other. This result is supported by a comparison of the Kullback and Leibler distances among the three clusters as inferred by the STRUCTURE program from both SSR and SNP data.
Simulation of the SNP ascertainment bias
To investigate the effect of ascertainment bias in the BOPA1 SNP panel on parameter estimates, we
 Collection size
Barley1K 896 IGB 65
size (h)
1.91 (1.7–2.1)
0.02 (0–0.16)
(Nem) 3.14 (0–7)
2.69 (0–7)
  Table 5 Population parameter estimates of the three clusters detected in the Barley1K collection based on the analysis of simple sequence repeat data with MIGRATE. Estimates based on the analysis of the Barley1K core collection. Effective population size (h) is in diagonal, and gene flow rate directions are from row to column; in brackets the 0.95 confidence intervals
  Desert Coast North
Desert
0.6 (0.42–0.78) 3.42 (0–7.5) 7.33 (2.5–11.5)
Coast
2.87 (0–7)
0.47 (0.28–0.64) 8.45 (3.5–12.5)
North
5.8 (1–10) 7.92 (3–12) 2.65 (2.36–2.63)
 Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1124 S. HU ̈ BNER ET AL.
Table 6 Posterior distributions for population parameters obtained by the ABC rejection–regression step of isolationwith-migration model for wild-cultivated (upper table) and the wild Barley1K clusters (lower table). Mode and quantiles indicated for estimated demographic parameters are based on microsatellite data
 0.35
 0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
 0.1 0.2
0.3 0.4 0.5
Minor allele frequency (MAF)
Fig. 7 Comparison of allele frequency distributions observed with the BOPA1 single nucleotide polymorphisms for the Barley1K core collection (‘Observed’), the expected unbiased distribution for a wild barley collection based on MIGRATE parameter estimates simulated in ms (‘Unbiased’), and expected biased distribution based on a small domesticated panel of polymorphism for genotyping a wild barley collection using MIGRATE parameters estimates for diversity and gene flow (‘Biased’).
  Biased Unbiased Observed
      Parameter Mode 0.025 Wild vs. cultivated barley
0.975
14000 9323.93 2732.27
10000 0.00100
0.00068
60772.28 89683.17 4883.49 2408.24
10000 0.00090
0.00100 0.00100
 Te Wild-Cultivated Ne Wild
Ne Cultivated
Ne Ancestor
M Wild
14000 6221.62
0 8267.83
0.00064 0.0001
7795.28 3031.3
0 4815.48
0.00030 0.0001
1000 9346.54
0
0 5970.6
0 0.00016 0.00033
M Cultivated
Wild barley populations
Te1
Te2
Ne Desert Ne Coast Ne North M Desert M Coast M North
12356.44 55366.34 1019.1
72.01 8897.89
0.00042 0.00100 0.00082
 conducted coalescent simulations of a demographic model in which a single domestication event separated the cultivated barley from its wild ancestor about 10 000 years ago. For this analysis, we employed population parameters and gene flow rates estimated by MIGRATE for wild Barley1K and the cultivated IGB collections. The two models were simulated 1000 times each, and the simulated allele frequency distributions were compared with the observed distribution with a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (Fig. 7). The first model included 215 wild barley accessions randomly sampled from wild barley in which all 1500 SNPs were included in the analysis (unbiased). The second model included 215 wild barley accessions genotyped only in sites that were polymorphic in a panel of eight accessions randomly sampled from cultivated barley (biased). The second model represents the SNP ascertainment procedure for the BOPA1 genotyping platform in which polymorphisms were identified in a panel of eight accessions of cultivated barley (Rostoks et al. 2005). As expected, the allele frequency distributions differed much between the biased and unbiased scenarios, especially in the proportion of rare alleles found in wild barley by distinct genotyping procedures. The observed frequency distribution of the biased set is not entirely devoid of rare alleles but showed a significantly lower proportion of rare alleles (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, D = 0.9352, P-value <0.0001) than the simulated unbiased allele frequency distribution for the wild barley sample.
Discussion
Wild barley Hordeum spontaneum is an interesting model system for studying plant adaptation, as it has a large geographic distribution and occurs in ecologically diverse environments. Because it is the ancestor of cultivated barley, it is also considered as a source of useful genes for expanding the narrow breeding populations of modern cultivated barley. For this reason, several issues need to be considered before investing into the detection of beneficial alleles originating from natural wild populations.
Gene flow between wild and cultivated barley
Cultivated barley has been grown in close proximity to its wild ancestor along the Fertile Crescent since its domestication. These two subspecies have no breeding barriers; therefore, it is expected that outcrossing events occurred throughout their shared history even though they are predominantly self-fertilizing. Empirical studies revealed that outcrossing events occur sporadically in different regions depending on environmental conditions (Abdel-Ghani et al. 2004). For this reason, the extent of gene flow needs to be considered in studies of local adaptation along the environmental gradient in the Levant. We searched for immigrants and evidence
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Relative proportion

of gene flow between populations with STRUCTURE for recent gene flow events and with MIGRATE for longer timescales. We identified several accessions as recent immigrants from cultivated into wild barley, and one accession in the cultivated barley collection was identified as being of wild origin. While gene flow from cultivated into wild barley may be explained by outcrossing events or dispersion of seeds (Volis et al. 2010), gene flow in the opposite direction was not expected and may be attributed to contamination during seed propagation in the Israeli gene bank. As contamination in germplasm collections of gene banks may occur over the years because of repeated propagations (Dreisigacker et al. 2005), the detection of such undesired events is possible with genetic fingerprinting. In areas where a crop and its wild relative coexist, it is reasonable to assume that gene flow events take place predominately from cultivars into the wild populations because cultivated populations usually occur in larger stands than wild species, and because seeds of cultivars are produced elsewhere and distributed by breeding companies repeatedly every year (Andersson & de Vicente 2010). As in previous studies (Morrell et al. 2005), we observed a high level of genetic diversity in the wild Barley1K collection, which indicates that wild barley in the south-western part of the Fertile Crescent is characterized by a large effective population size. However, our results suggest a lower effective population size (Ne = 4.775 · 103; l 􏰁 10)4) than was found by Morrell et al. (2003) for Western wild barley (Ne = 7 · 106; l 􏰁 10)9). These differences are expected because of our use of SSR compared with DNA sequences used by Morrell et al. and sample sizes used in the parameter estimation procedure. One major obstacle in using SSRs for estimating population parameters is their hypervariability caused by high mutation rate that is variable among loci. Time measurements of divergence and migration are difficult to estimate, but the use of genome-wide neutral markers results in reasonable estimates because they average out locus-specific effects of mutation and selection.
Inference of population structure
Gene flow between populations counteracts the process of population differentiation. A continuous gene flow between two differentiated populations, like the constant introgression of alleles from crops into their wild progenitors, may eventually reduce differences among wild subpopulations and affect our ability to detect them, even if the subpopulations are in an advanced stage towards differentiation. In our data, the inference of population structure in wild barley from the Levant was improved by excluding accessions that were identi-
fied as immigrants. This resulted in three genetic clusters in accordance with the three major environmental and geographic regions of Israel. In a previous study (Hu ̈bner et al. 2009), we identified three major genetic clusters using the same SSR markers employed in this species that could be further divided into a total of seven subpopulations in the Barley1K collection. Therefore, wild barley is characterized by a hierarchal population structure, which is expected for a self-fertilizing species. The exclusion of cultivated immigrants from the wild collection improved the clusteredness signal in all three data sets (Barley 1K SSR, Core collection SSR, and SNP data). Although a bias was introduced by defining a core collection from the Barley1K, clusteredness results were similar for both data sets. The improvement was better for the SSR than for the SNP data, which is probably caused by the different mutation rates of SSRs (􏰁10)4) and SNPs (􏰁10)8) that make microsatellites more powerful for analysing recent demographic changes.
The BOPA1 genotyping platform was developed from a panel of cultivated barley lines; hence, it suffers from an ascertainment bias when applied to genotyping wild germplasm and may cause incorrect results (Clark et al. 2005). Contrary to this expectation, there were only minor differences with respect to the number of clusters and assignment of accessions to the clusters. The ascertainment of the SNPs from a panel of cultivated barley introduces a bias against low-frequency SNPs in wild barley. Comparisons of observed SNP allele frequency distribution with simulated distributions under models with and without ascertainment bias confirmed that the underrepresentation of rare alleles in wild barley SNP data was because of ascertainment procedures. The main effect was a reduced power to detect recent population differentiation and recent gene flow between populations because rare ‘private’ alleles contain much information about the level of differentiation between populations (Slatkin 1985). Hence, the underrepresentation of rare alleles in a sample probably explains the low level of genetic differentiation between subpopulations in the SNP data and affects the estimates of genetic variation.
Gene flow among wild barley populations
Barley is considered to be a predominantly self-fertilizing species with an outcrossing rate of <2%; therefore, it is expected that barley has limited gene flow especially over large distances. According to our results, barley has fairly high rates of gene flow (Nem = 2.87–8.45) compared with other species (Ellstrand 2003) although it is hard to determine whether gene flow occurs mostly by outcrossing or seed dispersion. Ritala et al. (2002)
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
GENE FLOW
AND GENETIC CLUSTERS IN WILD BARLEY 1125

1126 S. HU ̈ BNER ET AL.
have shown that transgenic barley pollen migrates over short distances with a relatively low rate. However, even rare outcrossing events between large populations over long periods will accumulate to a significant level of gene flow (Ellstrand 1992). In addition to outcrossing, seed dispersion is an important mechanism of migration and gene flow. Wild barley seeds are characterized by long coarse awns that can attach to animal fur and human clothing and travel over large distances by hitchhiking with their carriers. Therefore, both seed dispersion and occasional outcrossing may act together in producing the high gene flow rates found for both historical and ongoing gene flow in wild barley.
Simple sequence repeats are characterized by high mutation rates compared with other genetic markers, and it is expected that analyses of the whole Barley1K collection with SSRs will result in poor estimates of both population and gene flow parameters. The inclusion of SSRs from various genomic regions and different repetitive motifs genotyped over large sample sizes reduce this effect and produce better estimates of population parameters (Lowe et al. 2004). The observed results were consistent and with expected levels of population diversity and gene flow patterns of wild barley in the Levant. Our analyses suggest that in wild barley, the net gene flow is directed from the northern Mediterranean region southwards, with a split into two directions in the southern part of the Sea of Galilee. One direction follows the dry Jordan Valley and reaches the southern region characterized by desert climate. The other direction follows the coastal Mediterranean region and is delimited on the east by the Judah and Samaria mountain ridge and the semi-arid region in the south. Effective gene flow between the coastal and desert regions was found to be low compared with the gene flow originating from the northern region. The reduced gene flow may result from unknown extrinsic geographic factors or differential adaptation to these two different environments (Fig. 6).
Both gene flow and effective population sizes found in MIGRATE for the microsatellite data set were supported by the approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) approach indicating that isolation-with-migration model fits the data better than the shared variants model. The range of time since the divergence of cultivated and wild barley estimated from our data (7795–14 000 years ago; Table 6) was found to be in accordance with the current estimate of barley domestication, 12 000 years ago (Salamini et al. 2002).
The genetic and geographic population structure of most Barley1K accessions was highly consistent with ecogeographic factors except for the Mt. Harif sampling site in the southern Negev desert. The accessions from
this site were assigned to the northern cluster, which was further supported by the plant phenotype because the growth in large dense stands as well as the morphology for long stalks and long awns represented the Mediterranean type. This location is characterized by a high altitude (􏰁1000 m) and very low winter temperatures compared with the surrounding desert. One explanation for this phenomenon could be a rapid and recent increase in temperature, leaving patches of the cold-tolerant ecotype at Mt. Harif, while lower and warmer surrounding regions were inhabited by a different desert ecotype. Another plausible explanation is that the northern ecotype was carried by humans or animals along the Incense Route in ancient times and was established in unpopulated locations or because it had a selective advantage over the local ecotype. Archaeological remains found in nearby world-heritage Nabatean sites (http://whc.unesco.org) probably indicate that the trading of goods and seeds took place.
Conclusion: adaptation in wild barley and its utilization in plant breeding
In this study, we further corroborated the extensive geographic population structure of wild barley in the Levant. Investigating the patterns of gene flow in wild barley populations indicated that sporadic introgressions occurred from cultivated barley in an ongoing process since domestication that was not only restricted to the south-western part of the Fertile Crescent (Badr et al. 2000; Abdel-Ghani et al. 2004, Russell et al. 2011). Gene flow between wild populations and their descendent crop plant may have a significant effect on the study of adaptation, domestication and genetic mapping, and therefore, they should be accounted for. The genetic marker system affects the inference of genetic distances and population structure, but both SSR and SNP markers produced similar estimates of population parameters. As the sequencing and genotyping technologies continue to evolve rapidly, future studies will be based on much larger and less biased marker data than the present study. However, the genotypic information presented in this study is already sufficient to select authentic wild accessions without introgressions of cultivated alleles for phenotypic and physiological studies of adaptive traits such as drought stress. The current study will aid the generation of new hypotheses to study the genetic basis of wild barley adaptation and its future use in plant breeding.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Rivka Hadas from the Israeli Plant Gene Bank (IGB) for providing the H. vulgare seeds, and Dr. Nils Stein
Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

from flow systems and other sources. Journal of
Histochemistry & Cytochemistry, 25, 935–941.
Zamir D (2001) Improving plant breeding with exotic genetic
libraries. Nature Reviews. Genetics, 2, 983–989.
Zohary D, Hopf M (2000) Domestication of Plants in the Old
World, 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
S.H. and T.G. are graduate students working on the population genetics of plant adaptation. A.F. is focused on the use of modern genomics tools for studying wild and cultivated barley. E.F. is interested in the genetic architecture of adaptive traits. A.G. works on identifying useful genes in wild barley and landraces for utilization in plant breeding, A.K. develops methods for genetic mapping. K.J.S is interested in elucidating evolutionary processes shaping genetic variation in wild and cultivated plants.
Data accessibility
Microsatellites and SNP data, and the Barley1K sampling location files were deposited in Dryad public archive (http://datadryad.org/) depository: doi: 10.5061/dryad.g94676pg.
Supporting information
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
Appendix S1. Command lines used for the coalescence simulations and ABC model testing.
Fig. S1. Prior and posterior distributions of each population parameter computed by ABC for the isolation-with-migration model analyzed with the wild and cultivated barley SSR data: Te wild-cultivated (A); Ne Wild (B); Ne Cultivated (C); Ne Ancestor (D); M Wild (E); M Cultivated (F).
Fig. S2. Prior and posterior distributions of each population parameter computed by ABC for isolation-with-migration model analyzed for the wild barley populations: Te1 (A); Te2 (B); Ne Desert (C); Ne Coast (D); Ne North (E); M Desert (F); M Coast (G); M North (H).
Table S1. Available information from the Israeli gene bank accessions that were analyzed in this study.
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
GENE FLOW AND GENETIC CLUSTERS IN WILD BARLEY 1129
  Ó 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
