  Do convergent ecomorphs evolve through convergent morphological pathways? Cranial shape evolution in fossil hyaenids and borophagine canids (Carnivora, Mammalia)
Author(s) :Zhijie Jack Tseng and Xiaoming Wang Source: Paleobiology, 37(3):470-489. 2011. Published By: The Paleontological Society
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1666/10007.1
URL: http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1666/10007.1
BioOne (www.bioone.org) is a nonprofit, online aggregation of core research in the biological, ecological, and environmental sciences. BioOne provides a sustainable online platform for over 170 journals and books published by nonprofit societies, associations, museums, institutions, and presses.
Your use of this PDF, the BioOne Web site, and all posted and associated content indicates your acceptance of BioOne’s Terms of Use, available at www.bioone.org/page/ terms_of_use.
Usage of BioOne content is strictly limited to personal, educational, and non-commercial use. Commercial inquiries or rights and permissions requests should be directed to the individual publisher as copyright holder.
       BioOne sees sustainable scholarly publishing as an inherently collaborative enterprise connecting authors, nonprofit publishers, academic institutions, research libraries, and research funders in the common goal of maximizing access to critical research.

Paleobiology, 37(3), 2011, pp. 470–489
Do convergent ecomorphs evolve through convergent morphological pathways? Cranial shape evolution in fossil hyaenids and borophagine canids (Carnivora, Mammalia)
Zhijie Jack Tseng and Xiaoming Wang
Abstract.—Cases of convergent evolution, particularly within ecomorphological contexts, are instructive in identifying universally adaptive morphological features across clades. Tracing of evolutionary pathways by which ecomorphological convergence takes place can further reveal mechanisms of adaptation, which may be strongly influenced by phylogeny. Ecomorphologies of carnivorous mammals represent some of the most outstanding cases of convergent evolution in the Cenozoic radiation of mammals. This study examined patterns of cranial shape change in the dog (Canidae) and hyena (Hyaenidae) families, in order to compare the evolutionary pathways that led to the independent specialization of bone-cracking hypercarnivores within each clade. Geometric morphometrics analyses of cranial shape in fossil hyaenids and borophagine canids provided evidence for deep-time convergence in morphological pathways toward the independent evolution of derived bone-crackers. Both clades contained stem members with plesiomorphic generalist/omnivore cranial shapes, which evolved into doglike species along parallel pathways of shape change. The evolution of specialized bone-crackers from these doglike forms, however, continued under the constraint of a full cheek dentition and restriction on rostrum length reduction in canids, but not hyaenids. Functionally, phylogenetic constraint may have limited borophagine canids to crack bones principally with their carnassial instead of the third premolar as in hyaenids, but other cranial shape changes associated with durophagy nevertheless evolved in parallel in the two lineages. Size allometry was not a major factor in cranial shape evolution in either lineage, supporting the interpretation of functional demands as drivers for the observed convergence. The comparison between borophagines and hyaenids showed that differential effects of alternative functional ‘‘solutions’’ that arise during morphological evolution may be multiplied with processes of the ‘‘macroevolutionary ratchet’’ already in place to further limit the evolutionary pathways available to specialized lineages.
Zhijie Jack Tseng. Integrative and Evolutionary Biology Program, Department of Biological Sciences, 3616 Trousdale Parkway, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, and Department of Vertebrate Paleontology, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, 900 Exposition Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90007. E-mail: jtseng@nhm.org
Xiaoming Wang. Department of Vertebrate Paleontology, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, 900 Exposition Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90007
Accepted: 28 December 2010
Introduction
Carnivorous mammals include a diverse range of ecomorphologies that have evolved iteratively (or repetitively, sensu Van Valkenburgh 1991) in different lineages; among the major categories are doglike and hyenalike forms (Van Valkenburgh 2007). To better understand patterns of ecomorphological evolution within these two categories, we examined the evolution of cranial shapes in the Canidae and Hyaenidae. The family Canidae is the most basal of the extant Caniformia, the former with a fossil record spanning 40 Myr (Wang et al. 2008), whereas the family Hyaenidae (Feliformia) has its
earliest record ca. 25 Ma (Turner et al. 2008) and an estimated molecular divergence date of 29 Ma from its feliform sister groups (Koepfli et al. 2006). The last common ancestor of these two families has an estimated geologic age near the split of the Caniformia-Feliformia, ca. 43 Ma (Wesley-Hunt and Flynn 2005). Fossil materials from these two families represent some of the most common and widespread carnivore fossils in their regions of origin (Old World for hyaenids and New World for canids). The two families lived their entire evolutionary histories in allopatry prior to the late Miocene (Qiu 2003), until the arrival of ‘‘Canis’’ cipio ca. 8–7 Ma in Spain (Crusafont-Pairo ́ 1950) and Vulpes at
’ 2011 The Paleontological Society. All rights reserved.
0094-8373/11/3703–0009/$1.00

CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 471
 FIGURE 1. Phylogenies and cranial morphological diversity of Canidae (A) and Hyaenidae (B). Data for canid phylogeny are from Wang (1994), Wang et al. (1999), and Tedford et al. (2009) and for hyaenids from Werdelin and Solounias (1991) and Koepfli et al. (2006). Genera used in this paper are labeled in black.
7 Ma in Africa (de Bonis et al. 2007). Subsequently, one single hyaenid genus, Chasmaporthetes, made the reciprocal immigration to the New World during the Pliocene ca. 4 Ma (Berta 1981; Hay 1921; Kurte ́n and Werdelin 1988; Qiu 2003). Among the three canid subfamilies, Hesperocyoninae, Borophaginae, and Caninae, borophagines overlapped most extensively with hyaenids in both temporal occurrence and morphological similarity, and surpassed Hyaenidae in taxonomic richness and ecologic breadth, the latter aspect evident in ecomorphs such as the extremely hypocarnivorous Cynarctus and Cynarctoides (Fig. 1) (Wang et al. 1999). Comparison of evolutionary changes in cranial shape between borophagine canids and hyaenids are therefore particularly appropriate for more in-depth analysis of previously suggested trends of convergence between the two families (Munthe 1989; Werdelin 1989; Wang et al. 1999).
Background.—Convergent evolution, a major topic in evolutionary biology, has been
shown to be a prominent and common feature of carnivorous mammals in the Cenozoic (Van Valkenburgh 2007). It has been demonstrated that there are few adaptive peaks taken in morphological evolution in response to different dietary needs among carnivores, resulting in the iterative appearance of similar morphologies that correspond to similar ecological roles (Werdelin 1996). These iterative ecomorphologies share adaptive aspects of the cranial, dental, and postcranial skeletons with modern carnivorans for which ecological and dietary habits are known (Van Valkenburgh 1985, 1988, 1989, 1999, 2001, 2007). In addition, each ecomorphology not only evolved iteratively through time in its respective continent of origin, but often appeared contemporaneously in geographically distant regions as well (Martin 1989; Werdelin 1989, 1996). The existence of similar ecomorphologies through time and space is not unique to mammalian predators; it has also been shown in guilds of modern avian predators (Van Valkenburgh

472 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
1995) and with some variations in theropod dinosaurs (Van Valkenburgh and Molnar 2002), the latter possessing a wider range of ecomorphological adaptations than previously thought as more discoveries are made (Zanno et al. 2009). These observations indicate that there are universally adaptive aspects to these stereotypical morphologies, and thus they are ideal cases to test hypotheses of form-function relationships and to discover mechanistic explanations underlying such extensive morphological convergence.
The most commonly evolved ecomorphology among carnivorous mammals is hypercarnivory (Crusafont-Pairo ́ and TruyolsSantonja 1956; Van Valkenburgh 2007), or specialization for eating meat, in which species evolve into catlike, wolf-like, or hyena-like ecomorphs (Werdelin 1996; Van Valkenburgh 2007). Quantitative studies in the shape and function of catlike species have shown that whereas conical-toothed cats exhibit skull shapes that can be best explained by allometry, the extremely hypercarnivorous sabertooth ecomorphs evolved cranial shape according to the demands of the canines as a killing weapon (Slater and Van Valkenburgh 2008). Furthermore, the evolution of elongate canines may have altered selective pressure toward more efficient killing mechanisms and secondarily reduced bite forces in those specialized clades (Christiansen 2008); these data are corroborated by evidence of relatively weak bite forces in the American sabertooth cat, Smilodon fatalis, demonstrated by finite element analysis of skull models (McHenry et al. 2007). The iterative evolution of sabertooth hypercarnivores and the similarity of those forms to each other (rather than their respective near relatives) strongly demonstrate a common set of selective requirements during the evolution of a particular ecomorph.
Compared to catlike species, however, wolf-like and hyena-like forms to date have not received as extensive a treatment in functional studies. The convergent evolution of these two ecomorphs is best illustrated by their namesake families: Canidae and Hyaenidae, respectively. The diversity of ecomorphs demonstrated by the family Hyaeni-
dae over their evolutionary history has been amply documented in studies of systematics and evolution, particularly in the appearance of wolf-like and hyena-like ecomorphs in the Old World during the Miocene (Werdelin and Solounias 1991, 1996; Turner et al. 2008). Similarly, the evolution of wolf-like and hyena-like canids has also been documented within the Borophaginae throughout the Cenozoic of North America (Van Valkenburgh 1991; Van Valkenburgh and Koepfli 1993; Wang 1994; Wang et al. 1999; Van Valkenburgh et al. 2004; Tedford et al. 2009). The current state of knowledge regarding these two ecomorphs remains at the interpretation that wolf-like and hyena-like hypercarnivores have evolved repeatedly in these two families in both craniodental and postcranial characteristics (Berta 1981; Van Valkenburgh 1985; Kurte ́n and Werdelin 1988; Werdelin 1989; Ferretti 1999; Stefen 1999; Stefen and Rensberger 2002; Ferretti 2007); however, the overall cranial shape changes that drove the iterative evolution of these ecomorphs and its functional implications for adaptation have not been investigated in more detail beyond linear morphometrics and visual comparisons of similar forms (Werdelin 1989; Werdelin and Solounias 1991). With an extreme ecomorphology such as that of bone-cracking hypercarnivores, functional demands are expected to be severe, and selective pressures high (Van Valkenburgh 2007); differences in mechanical performance between modern bone-cracking and non-bone-cracking carnivoran species provide support for this interpretation (Tseng 2009). On a macroevolutionary time scale, however, are overall cranial shape changes evidence of convergent evolution of specialized ecomorphs, as well as convergence among species along the morphological pathways upon which these specialists evolved? Are wolf-like and hyena-like ecomorphs part of an evolutionary sequence that occurred in a particular order within the borophagine canids and hyaenids? What is the evolutionary pattern with regard to ecomorphological convergence over the entire fossil history of these two carnivoran groups? This study explored these issues using geometric morphometrics analysis.

Abbreviations.—AMNH, American Museum of Natural History, New York; CMNH, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; F:AM, Frick Collection, American Museum of Natural History, New York; FMNH, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago; HMZ, Hezheng Museum of Paleozoology, Gansu, China; IVPP, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing; JODA, John Day Fossil Beds National Monument, Oregon; LACM, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Los Angeles; MCZ, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts; MGL, Muse ́e ge ́ologique de Lausanne, Romandy, Switzerland; MNCN, Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales-CSIC, Madrid; MVZ, Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley; NHMA-MTLB, Mytilinii1B collection in the Natural History Museum of Aegean, Mytilinii, Greece; NMB, Naturhistorisches Museum Basel, Switzerland; PPHM, Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon, Texas; TMM, Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas, Austin; UAMZ, University of Alberta Museum of Zoology, Edmonton, Canada; UCMP, University of California Museum of Paleontology, Berkeley, California; USNM/ NMNH, National Museum of Natural History (Smithsonian), Washington, D.C.
Materials and Methods
To summarize the variation observed in cranial shapes of borophagine canids and hyaenids, we used two-dimensional geometric morphometrics analysis. Our analyses were performed on planar views of the skull specimens, which have been shown to display meaningful interand intraspecific variation in other closely related carnivorans (Slater and Van Valkenburgh 2008; Figueirido et al. 2009; Tanner et al. 2010). Dorsal, lateral, and ventral views of each skull specimen were used in three separate analyses. Because our main interest is in ecomorphological evolution, we placed shape data of canid and hyaenid crania in the context of two major extant carnivoran guilds: the East African (including Serengeti) and the North American (‘‘Yellowstone’’) carnivore faunas (Van Valk-
enburgh 1988). Overlap in the distributions of each species in a morphospace implies potential overlap in ecomorphology, assuming form, function, and ecology are closely linked (Lauder 1995, 1996; Raia 2004). The modern species used to represent each of the two guilds are listed in Table 1; the fossil canid and hyaenid species are in Table 2. A total of 413 modern and fossil specimens were used in the analyses (specimens used are listed in Appendix 1, available through Dryad at doi:10.5061/dryad.8577).
All specimens were photographed with an Olympus m720sw digital camera (images with 3072 3 2304 pixels); the skulls were positioned so that in lateral view their midsagittal plane is parallel to the lens of the camera, and in dorsal and ventral view the frontal plane is parallel to the camera. Where possible, a grid was placed behind the cranium so any distortion at the edge of the photos could be detected. Crania placed within the central 30% of the viewing area of the camera displayed no distortion around the edge of the specimens; cranial morphology was therefore faithfully reproduced by the photos. Several rare species were included in the analyses by digitizing published photographs of the specimens (Table 2); only complete fossil specimens were included, and no attempt was made to test for distortion in these published photos. Sets of dorsal (n 5 8), lateral (n 5 12), and ventral (n 5 9) anatomical landmarks were used to represent the craniodental shapes (Table 3, Fig. 2). Only Type I and II landmarks were used; these types of landmarks represent joints, sutures, or features of local maxima that could be unambiguously identified across the taxonomic sampling chosen in the study (Bookstein 1991). Although many more such landmarks are present than the ones chosen, a balance had to be struck between capturing the greatest amount of shape information and including slightly less-complete fossil specimens for larger sample size and wider taxonomic sampling.
Landmarks were digitized from photographs using TPSDig 2.05 (Rohlf 2006a), which converted points marked on the photographs into Cartesian x,y coordinates.
CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 473

474 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
TABLE 1. Carnivoran species used to represent the East African and North American modern carnivore guilds, respectively. Lists are in alphabetical order by family then genus.
  East Africa (incl. Serengeti) Canidae
1. Canis aureus (n 5 8)
2. Lycaon pictus (n 5 8)
3. Otocyon megalotis (n 5 7)
Felidae
4. Acinonyx jubatus (n 5 2) 5. Caracal caracal (n 5 1)
6. Felis sylvestris (n 5 7)
7. Panthera leo (n 5 23)
8. Panthera pardus (n 5 9)
Herpestidae
9. Atilax paludinosus (n 5 5)
10. Bdeogale crassicauda (n 5 5) 11. Herpestes sanguineus (n 5 8) 12. Ichneumia albicauda (n 5 2)
Hyaenidae
13. Crocuta crocuta (n 5 45)
14. Hyaena hyaena (n 5 2)
15. Parahyaena brunnea (n 5 2) 16. Proteles cristatus (n 5 6)
Mustelidae
17. Ictonyx striatus (n 5 3) 18. Mellivora capensis (n 5 1)
Nandiniidae
19. Nandinia binotata (n 5 5)
Viverridae
20. Civettictis civetta (n 5 4)
21. Genetta maculata (n 5 8) 22. Genetta pardina (n 5 1) 23. Genetta rubiginosa (n 5 5)
The coordinates were then superimposed by a Procrustes fit using CoordGen6 in the Integrated Morphometrics Package (IMP) (Sheets 2004), where specimens were scaled, rotated, and aligned on their landmarks, their differences calculated, and absolute size removed. This operation allowed comparison of the shapes in isolation of their relative sizes, at the same time preserving any allometric effects that might be further analyzed. Relative warp analysis (RWA) was performed on the entire data set for each view in TPSRelw (Rohlf 2006b). Morphological variation as summarized by RWA can be visualized by bivariate plots of relative warp axes, essentially a principal components analysis weighed by bending energy of shape changes; relative differences in shape were plotted as thin-plate splines that display deformation grids relative to the mean shape configuration represented
North America/Yellowstone Canidae
I. Alopex lagopus (n 5 10)
II. Canis latrans (n 5 10)
III. Canis lupus (n 5 11)
IV. Urocyon cinereoargenetus (n 5 1) V. Vulpes vulpes (n 5 12)
Felidae
VI. Lynx canadensis (n 5 5)
VII. Lynx rufus (n 5 5)
VIII. Puma concolor (n 5 10)
Mephitidae
IX. Mephitis mephitis (n 5 4)
Mustelidae
X. Gulo gulo (n 5 5)
XI. Martes pennanti (n 5 10) XII. Mustela frenata (n 5 10) XIII. Mustela nivalis (n 5 1) XIV. Neovison vison (n 5 2) XV. Taxidea taxus (n 5 6)
Procyonidae
XVI. Procyon lotor (n 5 3)
Ursidae
XVII. Ursus americanus (n 5 10) XVIII. Ursus arctos (n 5 11)
by the origin of the bivariate RW plots (Zelditch et al. 2004). Because shape differences are commonly summarized by the first few relative warp axes, as in principal components analysis, we chose to use only the axes that explained more than 10% of the total variance in shape to visualize evolutionary trends.
Because of differences in the quality and number of preserved skulls among fossil canids and hyaenids, the fossil specimens were grouped by genera in our analyses; specimens of congeneric species were combined in calculating mean values in the relative warp analysis. Although this action has an underlying assumption that cranial shape changes little within a genus (which may or may not be true), the relatively small sample sizes of even the best collections of these fossil species necessitated a less detailed analysis than one possible with modern
  
CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 475
TABLE 2. List of fossil canids, hyaenids, and stem fossil forms used in the study. List for Canidae and Hyaenidae are in order of geological and evolutionary appearance.
  Canidae Hesperocyoninae
A. Hesperocyon gregarius (n 5 13)
B. Paraenhydrocyon josephi (n 5 3)
C. Mesocyon temnodon (n 5 1)
M. coryphaeus (n 5 4)
M. brachyops (n 5 1)
D. Cynodesmus thooides (n 5 3)
E. Enhydrocyon crassidens (n 5 1)
E. pahinsintewakpa (n 5 1)
E. stenocephalus (n 5 1)
F. Osbornodon fricki (n 5 1)
O. iamonensis (n 5 1)
Borophaginae
G. Archaeocyon pavidus (n 5 1)
A. falkenbachi (n 5 1) H. Otarocyon cooki (n 5 1)
I. Rhizocyon oregonensis (n 5 1)
J. Phlaocyon minor (n 5 1)
P. multicuspus (n 5 1)
P. leucosteus (n 5 1)
K. Desmocyon thomsoni (n 5 2)
D. matthewi (n 5 1)
L. Paracynarctus sinclairi (n 5 1) M. Microtomarctus conferta (n 5 2)
N. Protomarctus optatus (n 5 3)
O. Tomarctus brevirostris (n 5 1)
P. Aelurodon stirtoni (n 5 1)
A. mcgrewi (n 5 1) A. ferox (n 5 5)
A. taxoides (n 5 1)
Q. Paratomarctus temerarius (n 5 3) P. euthos (n 5 2)
R. Epicyon saevus (n 5 5) E. haydeni (n 5 4)
S. Borophagus littoralis (n 5 1) B. secundus (n 5 5)
Caninae
T. Canis dirus (n 5 2)
Hyaenidae Ictitherinae
a. Plioviverrops orbignyi (n 5 2) { b. Tungurictis spocki (n 5 1)
c. Ictitherium sp. (n 5 2)
d. Hyaenictitherium wongi (n 5 10) e. H. hyaenoides (n 5 4)
Hyaeninae
f. Lycyaena dubia (n 5 1)
g. Chasmaporthetes lunensis (n 5 1) h. Ikelohyaena abronia (n 5 1)
i. Adcrocuta eximia (n 5 11)
OTHER
Stem carnivoramorphans
‘Miacis’ cognitus (n 5 1) Ooedectes herpestoides (n 5 1) Prohesperocyon wilsoni (n 5 1) *
Percrocutidae
Dinocrocuta gigantea (n 5 7)
  * Specimen was analyzed but later removed from analysis for incompleteness.
{ One specimen (MGL271S) was used but the lateral premaxilla landmarks were estimated.
TABLE 3. Anatomical landmarks used in the respective geometric morphometrics analyses. See Figure 2 for illustration.
  Dorsal
1. Suture, premaxilla/maxilla
2. Dorsal rim, infraorbital foramen 3. Rostral edge of orbit
4. Lateral tip of postorbital process 5. Rostral base of zygomatic arch 6. Caudal base of zygomatic arch 7. Caudal tip of sagittal crest
8. Suture, nasal/frontal
Lateral
1. Premaxilla/maxilla/canine junction 2. Caudal maxilla/canine junction
3. Maxillar/P3/P4 junction
4. Caudal maxilla/P4 junction
5. Caudal suture, maxilla/jugal
6. Tip, post-glenoid process
7. Inflection point, caudal and ventral
faces of temporal fossa
8. Inflection point, sagittal/occipital crests 9. Junction, frontal crest/dorsal edge of
cranium
10. Dorsal edge, long axis of orbit
11. Rostral junction, nasal/premaxilla
12. Mid-point, rim of infraorbital foramen
Ventral
1. Premaxilla/maxilla/canine junction 2. Lateral border, P2/P3 junction
3. Lateral border, P3/P4 junction
4. Caudal tip, P4
5. Medial edge, post-glenoid process 6. Mastoid process (widest point of
basicranium)
7. Ventral-midsagittal edge, foramen
magnum
8. Caudal-midsagittal edge, palatine 9. Caudal-midsagittal point, incisive
foramina
  
476 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
 FIGURE 2. Dorsal (A), lateral (B), and ventral (C) anatomical landmarks used in geometric morphometrics analysis. See Table 3 for explanation of the landmarks.
species. Incorporating more collections and additional discoveries of fossil canids and hyaenids may increase the sample size and quality of the current data, and this is probably more so for hyaenids. The fossil canids used were mainly from the extensive Childs Frick collection of the American Museum of Natural History. Our fossil hyaenid data come mainly from two collections: the AMNH Frick Collection and HMZ; these data were supplemented with specimens from other museums when exceptionally complete or rare specimens were available.
To test for allometric effects of cranial shape change, fossil canid and hyaenid shape data
were regressed against the natural logarithm (ln) of centroid size (CS) using TPSRegr 1.31 (Rohlf 2005). Overall shape as represented by partial warp and uniform component scores of the specimens were regressed against ln (CS), and multivariate tests of significance were conducted to evaluate the strength of correlation between size and shape. In addition, RW axes that explained more than 10% of variance in shape were examined by regressing genus mean RW scores for those axes against mean ln (CS). To account for effects of phylogeny on the correlation between skull shape and size, we used the PDAP module (Midford et al. 2008) of Mesquite (Maddison and Maddison 2009) to calculate phylogenetic independent contrasts of genus mean RW scores and ln (CS), and regression analysis was performed on the contrasts. Contrasts were calculated using the tree topology in Figure 1, with equal branch lengths.
Results
Dorsal Cranial Shape.—RW1 and RW2 scores were plotted to show fossil canids and hyaenids with extant faunas of North America and East Africa, respectively (Fig. 3A,D). RW1 accounted for 45.42% of the variance in shape, and RW2 accounted for 18.43%. Borophagines and hyaenids occupy similar areas in morphospace, but the former have more positive RW2 scores, in general. Both display little overlap with extant carnivorans in their respective faunas. Borophagines are bounded in morphospace by small-bodied generalists (more positive RW1 scores), canines (more negative RW1 scores), hesperocyonines (more positive RW2 scores), and Ursus (more negative RW2 scores) (Fig. 3A). Hyaenids are bounded by small-bodied generalists (more positive RW1 scores), canines (more negative RW1 scores), and Panthera (more negative RW2 scores) (Fig. 3D).
The most ancestral genera of borophagines and hyaenids tend to have large, positive RW1 scores, corresponding to shorter rostrum and relatively long cranial region (Fig. 4A; e.g., Ota, Por). Subsequent borophagine genera and doglike hyaenids tend to have more negative RW1 scores, corresponding to longer

CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 477
 FIGURE 3. Relative warp plots of fossil canids and hyaenids grouped with extant North American (A–C) and East African (D–F) carnivoran faunas, respectively. The first two relative warp axes are displayed. Plots show dorsal (A,D), lateral (B,E), and ventral (C,F) cranial landmark analyses. Shaded polygons indicate areas of morphospace occupied by borophagine canids (A–C) and hyaenids (D–F).
rostrum and relatively short cranial region (Fig. 4A,B; e.g., Mic, Pro, Hwh, Lyc). The derived bone-cracking hyaenids, however, have more positive RW1 scores as in the ancestral forms (Fig. 4A,B; e.g., Ccr, Iab). The derived borophagines (Bor, Epi, Ael) have negative RW1 scores overlapping those of stem borophagines as well as the doglike hyaenids, and do not approach the derived hyaenids in morphospace. Along the RW2
axis, hyaenids tend to have more negative RW2 scores, corresponding to a wider cranium, more caudally set postorbital processes, and more elongate temporal fossae than borophagines (Fig. 4C). In this regard, borophagines evolved toward the condition seen in hyaenids with increasingly negative RW2 scores (Fig. 4B).
Lateral Cranial Shape.—Borophagines and hyaenids, again, share adjacent positions in

478 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
 FIGURE 4. Plots of relative warp scores and shape evolution in borophagine canids and hyaenids, dorsal cranial landmarks. A, RW1 versus RW2 scores. B, Phylogenies plotted over RW1 versus RW2 scores. C, Deformation grids showing shape changes represented by RW1 and RW2 axes.
morphospace, and the former in general have more positive RW2 scores compared to hyaenids (Fig. 3B,E). Borophagines are bounded by canines (more positive RW1 scores), small-bodied generalists (more negative RW1 scores and more positive RW2 scores), and hesperocyonines (negative RW2 scores) (Fig. 3B). Hyaenids are bounded by canines (more positive RW1 scores), smallbodied generalists (negative RW1 scores), and felids (positive RW2 scores) (Fig. 3E). RW1 accounted for 36.98% of total variance in shape, with RW2 accounting for 18.09%, and RW3 15.29% (Fig. 5).
In lateral shape, ancestral borophagines and hyaenids tend to have more negative RW1 scores, closer to the extant small-bodied generalists, and corresponding to shorter rostrum, longer cranial region, and dorsoventrally compressed skull (Fig. 5A–C; Ota, Arc, Tsp). More derived forms tend to have increasingly positive RW1 and RW2 scores,
corresponding to a deepening cranial region, a more arching dorsal skull, and a shortened and deepened rostrum (Fig. 5A, Ccr, Bor). The two lineages are parallel in this trend. The derived bone-cracking borophagine Borophagus (Bor) and hyaenid Crocuta (Ccr) both share the most positive RW1, RW2, and the most negative RW3 scores in their respective lineages, corresponding with further deepening of the cranial region and a more caudal position of the cheek dentition (Fig. 5C,F).
Ventral Cranial Shape.—Borophagines and hyaenids occupy distinct and non-overlapping regions in ventral cranial morphospace (Fig. 3C,F). Borophagines are bounded by small-bodied generalists (positive RW1 scores), canines and hesperocyonine canids (positive RW2 scores), and felids (negative RW2 scores). Hyaenids are bound by canines (more positive RW1 and RW2 scores) and felids (more positive RW1, more negative RW2 scores). RW1 accounted for 43.66% of total variance in shape, with RW2 accounting for 19.10%, and RW3 13.91% (Fig. 6A,D).
In ventral view more derived forms tend to have more negative RW1 scores in both borophagines and hyaenids (Fig. 6A,B; e.g., Ccr, Hhy, Ael, Bor); this corresponded to widening of the palate and more caudally set cheek dentition (Fig. 6C). The more derived forms also tend to have more negative RW2 values (except for the stem borophagine Otarocyon), also corresponding to widening of the palate (Fig. 6B,C). Derived borophagines have more negative RW3 scores, corresponding to more elongate palate and more caudal position of cheek dentition (Fig. 6D–F, Bor, Ael). This last trend is not observed in hyaenids (Fig. 6E).
Regression Analysis.—Ln (CS) was not significantly correlated with overall cranial shape in fossil hyaenid specimens in dorsal, lateral, or ventral analyses (Table 4). For borophagines, only dorsal cranial shape showed significant correlation with size (Wilks’s l 5 0.37, F(12,31) 5 4.38, p , 0.0001). Among the RW axes visualized for evolutionary trends (Figs. 4–6), none had significant correlation with size in regression analyses using independent contrasts (Table 4).

CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 479
 FIGURE 5. Plots of relative warp scores and shape evolution in borophagine canids and hyaenids, lateral cranial landmarks. A, RW1 versus RW2 scores. B, Phylogenies plotted over RW1 versus RW2 scores. C, Deformation grids showing shape changes represented by RW1 and RW2 axes. D, RW1 versus RW3 scores. E, Phylogenies plotted over RW1 versus RW3 scores. F, Deformation grids showing shape changes represented by RW1 and RW3 axes. Symbols and abbreviations as in Figure 3. Note parallel evolutionary changes in borophagine canids and hyaenids toward more positive RW1 scores.
Discussion
To examine the morphological pathways that led to the independent evolution of bonecracking hypercarnivores in borophagine canids and hyaenids, we conducted geometric morphometrics analyses of cranial shape in the phylogenetic context of the two lineages. The evolutionary trends observed in dorsal, lateral, and ventral cranial shape changes provided strong evidence for convergent evolution not only in the specialized bonecracking hypercarnivores, but also in species along the morphological pathways upon which they evolved. Morphological pathways through phylogeny were parallel in direction for ancestral, intermediate, and specialized borophagines and hyaenids. Even though cranial shape showed largely convergent or parallel changes in the two lineages, major differences still existed between them in the extent of the morphological trajectories along
those similar pathways. Phylogenetic constraint in canids is a likely factor contributing to those differences, as demonstrated below.
Hyaenids and canids are two of the longest surviving carnivoran lineages, with little interchange between their respective places of origins in the Old and New Worlds during the Miocene, and their morphological similarities have been used as evidence for ecological similarity (Qiu 2003; Werdelin and Solounias 1991). Major ecomorphological groups of modern carnivorans (catlike hypercarnivores, canines, small-bodied generalists) are clearly segregated in our analyses, suggesting that the cranial shape morphospace captures some ecological information (Fig. 3). Within this context, overall similarity between borophagines and hyaenids (Fig. 3A,B and D,E) is consistent with competitive exclusion as an ecological mechanism to explain the lack of intercontinental dispersal

480 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
 FIGURE 6. Plots of relative warp scores and shape evolution in borophagine canids and hyaenids, ventral cranial landmarks. A, RW1 versus RW2 scores. B, Phylogenies plotted over RW1 versus RW2 scores. C, Deformation grids showing shape changes represented by RW1 and RW2 axes. D, RW1 versus RW3 scores. E, Phylogenies plotted over RW1 versus RW3 scores. F, Deformation grids showing shape changes represented by RW1 and RW3 axes. Symbols and abbreviations as in Figure 3. Note lack of overlap between borophagine canids and hyaenids in morphospace.
during the Miocene, despite the fact that many other large, cursorial carnivorans have managed to immigrate to North America. In other words, if fossil borophagine canids and hyaenids were to become sympatric in North America, they would have overlapped more in morphospace with each other than they would with other carnivorans (Fig. 3). In dorsal cranial shape the hyaenids Lycyaena
(Lyc) and Chasmaporthetes (Clu), and the doglike Hyaenictitherium (Hwh) are very similar to borophagines (Fig. 4). In lateral cranial shape these and other hyaenid genera are adjacent to borophagines, but also overlap with hesperocyonines (Fig. 3B,E). Ictitherium has been interpreted as jackal-like, and Hyaenictitherium hunting doglike, on the basis of overall assessment of craniodental mor-
TABLE 4. Tests for allometry: regression statistics for cranial shape variables versus ln(Centroid Size). All partial warp (PW) and uniform component scores of fossil hyaenid and borophagine specimens were regressed against ln(CS). Phylogenetic independent contrasts (PIC) for average relative warp scores for each genus as presented in Figures 4–6 were regressed (through the origin) against PICs for ln(CS). Significant correlation between dorsal shape and ln(CS) in borophagines (p-value in bold) is associated with narrower/more tubular dorsal skulls in larger specimens.
  Specimen PW/uniform scores Genera RW (PIC-adjusted) Wilks’sl F p F p
    Hyaenidae (fossil only) Borophaginae
Dorsal Lateral Ventral Dorsal Lateral Ventral
0.64 F(12,19) 5 0.88 0.58 0.32 F(20,16) 5 1.67 0.15 0.43 F(14,11) 5 1.03 0.49 0.37 F(12,31) 5 4.38 ,0.0001 0.45 F(20,29)5 1.72 0.09 0.67 F(14,28) 5 0.98 0.50
F(3,6) 5 1.02 0.45 F(3,7) 5 0.56 0.66 F(3,5) 5 0.31 0.82 F(3,9) 5 0.96 0.45 F(3,9) 5 0.55 0.66 F(3,8) 5 1.82 0.22
 
phology (Werdelin and Solounias 1991). These genera, and in fact all but one hyaenid genus, were restricted to the Old World. The only hyaenids to disperse to North America were members of the genus Chasmaporthetes, which have evolved gracile postcranial skeletons adapted for increased cursoriality (Kurte ́n 1968; Ewer 1973; Berta 1981; Kurte ́n and Werdelin 1988).
In the Old World, specialized bone-cracking hyaenids evolved as early as the late Miocene (excluding middle Miocene Percrocuta and late Miocene Dinocrocuta, which may be sister to true hyaenids), represented by genera such as Adcrocuta (Werdelin and Solounias 1991, 1996). This niche continued to be occupied in the Plio-Pleistocene by Pliocrocuta, Pachycrocuta, and Crocuta (Turner and Anto ́n 1996). Borophagine canids were never found in the Old World, and the first canids known to cross Beringia were members of Caninae, which had more elongate skulls lacking the morphological adaptations of bone-crackers (Qiu 2003; Wang et al. 2008). These observations also provide support for the ecological competitive exclusion model. Members of these two lineages not only overlapped in their derived bone-cracking morphology, but also paralleled each other in many aspects of cranial shape changes during their evolution (Figs. 4–6). Accordingly, these two lineages remained allopatric for much of the Miocene and Pliocene, during which time other carnivorans repeatedly dispersed across Beringia (Qiu 2003; Werdelin and Solounias 1991).
Evolutionary Trends.—Because of the comparable diversity and inferred ecomorphological convergence between hyaenids and borophagine canids (Werdelin 1989; Wang et al. 1999; Van Valkenburgh 2007), we concentrated our sampling of canids within borophagines and hesperocyonines (Tables 1, 2). Nevertheless, the extant canids examined in this study cluster in their morphospace distribution and are distinct from most borophagines and hesperocyonines (Fig. 3). In dorsal and lateral cranial shape, the three subfamilies of canids occupied different areas of morphospace: canines have more negative dorsal RW1 and more positive lateral RW1
scores than borophagines, which in turn have less positive dorsal RW2 and more positive lateral RW2 scores than hesperocyonines (Fig. 3A,B). These differences corresponded to widening of the palate, deepening of the cranial region, and doming of the forehead between hesperocyonines and borophagines, and then elongation of the rostrum and shortening of the cranial region between the extinct subfamilies and canines (Fig. 4C, 5C). Even though the three canid subfamilies evolved independently from a common ancestor very much like Hesperocyon, and hypercarnivory evolved iteratively within each clade (Van Valkenburgh 1991; Van Valkenburgh et al. 2004), their distributions in morphospace remained distinct. The evolutionary pathways taken within borophagines appear to be a continuation of the trends already seen during the evolution of hesperocyonines and borophagines; the latter replaced the former as the dominant canid hypercarnivores of the Neogene (Wang et al. 1999). Canines, however, did not evolve specialized bone-cracking ecomorphs (Tedford et al. 2009). Thus, our results show that morphospace occupied by hyaenids in East Africa is taken up by hesperocyonines and borophagines in North America, as consistent with previous interpretation (Fig. 3).
Even though the different cranial views provided somewhat different morphospace arrangements of borophagines and hyaenids, the overarching pattern of convergence is quite clear (Figs. 4–6). The differences that remain are aspects of borophagine evolution we interpret as products of phylogenetic constraint. Both the extensive overlap between intermediate borophagines and doglike hyaenids in dorsal cranial shape and the subsequent separation of derived bone-cracking hyaenids from their counterparts in Borophaginae are indicative of constraints in the dorsal cranial shape of borophagines (Fig. 4B). Bone-cracking hyaenids evolved a shorter rostrum and relatively longer cranial regions compared to their doglike predecessors (Fig. 5). These changes are likely associated with enlargement of the masticatory musculature, by accommodating more muscle attachment areas via expansion of the
CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 481

482 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
cranial regions (Fig. 4C). Furthermore, the relative shortening of the rostrum created a more favorable arrangement of the palate for masticatory mechanical advantage (Greaves 1985; Werdelin 1989). Derived borophagines appear to be restricted to the part of dorsal cranial morphospace that corresponds to more elongate rostrum, and this could be a constraint imposed by the retention of a full set of molars in their cheek dentition. This constraint is also evident in ventral cranial shape (see below). In some cases, however, terminal Borophagus specimens do show a very short rostrum comparable to the degree seen in hyaenids, suggesting that intraspecific variation may exemplify more extreme morphologies than is observed on the genus level.
In contrast, lateral cranial shape does not appear to be restricted in morphological trajectory in borophagines, and a complete parallel can be seen between them and the hyaenids (Fig. 5B,E). More specifically, in contrast to the consistent trend of increasing RW1 scores through evolution, RW2 and RW3 scores do not show a dramatic change in either borophagines or hyaenids until the terminal Borophagus and the modern hyaenines (Crocuta, Hyaena, Parahyaena) appeared, respectively (Fig. 5; Bor, Ccr, Hhy, Pbr). In these derived genera, RW2 values are more positive, and RW3 more negative, than in other genera in their respective lineages, corresponding to deeper and more dorsally domed skulls (Fig. 5C,F). These morphological features are associated with increased skull strength and better dissipation of masticatory stress in extant bone-crackers (Tanner et al. 2008; Tseng 2009). Parallel changes in these aspects of morphology, even though identical in their direction and timing, still did not create overlap in the borophagine and hyaenid ecomorphs. The trends are therefore entirely parallel in nature.
Ventral cranial shape changes are also parallel between borophagines and hyaenids in their direction of evolution. However, the morphospaces traversed by the two groups are almost entirely offset along RW1 and RW3 axes (Fig. 6E). These offsets indicate that even in the most derived borophagines, the extent of rostral widening and caudal placement of
the cheek dentition do not approach the degree seen in the stem generalist hyaenid Tungurictis (Fig. 6D,E; Tsp). This observation may be explained by the same phenomenon seen in dorsal cranial shape changes, where rostrum shortening is restricted in the derived borophagines. The full set of molars present in canids would, again, constrain the degree of caudal movement of the premolar dentition. The functional implications of this phylogenetic constraint in canids have already been discussed by Werdelin (1989), who proposed that as a consequence of molar retention, borophagine canids used their carnassials as the main bone-cracking teeth in the upper dentition, instead of the third premolars as in hyaenids (Fig. 2). This alternative ‘‘solution’’ to functional demands of bone-cracking would have hindered the ability of bone-cracking borophagines to use their carnassials for shearing meat (the plesiomorphic function of those teeth), shortly after full eruption and use.
The carnassial-based bone-cracking specialization that evolved in borophagines may be different from the morphological arrangement seen in hyaenids, but those derived ecomorphs do appear to share functional advantage in bite force and skull strength over those of their non-robust relatives (Tseng 2009; Tseng and Wang 2010). Thus, alternative ‘‘solutions’’ to similar functional demands may be equally sufficient, at least in a functional sense. On the macroevolutionary scale, however, repeated specialization for hypercarnivory in canids has been shown to decrease long-term evolutionary potential (Van Valkenburgh et al. 2004; Werdelin 1989) as well as morphological disparity in those lineages (Holliday and Steppan 2004). The interaction between phylogenetic constraint (which may be partially derived from previous bouts of specialization) and the process of adaptation resulted in convergent bone-cracking ecomorphs between borophagines and hyaenids, but the former was accordingly restricted in the distance traveled in the same morphological pathways through evolution (Figs. 4–6). On top of that, the loss of carnassial shearing function is arguably detrimental to long-term evolutionary fitness

of the lineage: the Borophaginae became extinct at the end of the Blancan North American Land Mammal Age, with the bone-cracking Borophagus as its last remaining members (Wang et al. 1999). Many of our findings are consistent with this ‘‘macroevolutionary ratchet’’ model of specialization (Van Valkenburgh et al. 2004), but our results also show that there is still some flexibility even in lineages with restricted evolutionary potential, and functionally comparable bonecracking ecomorphs can nevertheless arise through parallel processes under different background constraints.
In our preceding discussion of evolutionary trends with regard to hypercarnivory, we have largely ignored the myrmecophagous aardwolf, Proteles cristatus (Pcr in figures). Given its peculiar adaptation for a hyaenid, its placement in the evolutionary changes leading to bone-cracking hypercarnivory is unclear. Furthermore, the ancestry and phylogenetic position of the aardwolf is still controversial; morphology and third-position transversions of the cytochrome b gene seem to indicate a much earlier divergence from other hyaenids (Jenks and Werdelin 1998; Werdelin and Solounias 1991) than suggested by molecular analysis with the mitochondrial cytochrome b sequence (Koepfli et al. 2006). In our analysis, the Hyaenidae seem to follow a more or less gradual path through morphospace in dorsal, lateral, and ventral cranial shapes; the position of Proteles, offset from the main course of hyaenid evolution (Figs. 4–6), creates difficulties in resolving its functional or phylogenetic position using only cranial shape. Therefore, more detailed analyses regarding its evolutionary affinities are required before it can be interpreted within the current context.
Among other extant hyaenids, only Crocuta hunt large prey and are observed to routinely consume large amounts of bone (Kruuk 1972). Parahyaena (Pbr) and Hyaena (Hhy) are generalists, consuming fruit and vegetables as a sizable proportion of their diet, and do not actively hunt prey larger than themselves (Mills and Mills 1978; Mills 1990). Dorsal and ventral cranial shape analyses did not differentiate between these dietary differences, and
the derived hyaenines share more positive RW1 scores in dorsal shape (Fig. 4A) and more negative RW1–RW3 scores in ventral shape (Fig. 6A,D) compared to other hyaenids. Differentiation is observed in lateral cranial shape, however. The derived hyaenines have similar lateral RW2 and RW3 scores, but lateral RW1 scores in the large generalists are more negative than in most other hyaenids (Fig. 5B,E). In the extant carnivoran faunas, species with the most negative lateral RW1 scores are small-bodied generalists (Fig. 3B,E). The generalist diet of Hyaena and Parahyaena is thus correlated with lateral RW1 scores that are more negative than in the bone-cracking hypercarnivores, and is similar to the diet of ancestral hyaenids and extant generalist carnivorans in this regard. This differentiation, which is visible only in lateral cranial shape, highlights the importance of examining different views of the skull in interpreting shape evolution trends.
Among the bone-crackers, whereas Borophagus showed parallel lateral cranial shape changes with Crocuta relative to their near relatives in lateral RW1–RW3 scores, the former approached hyaenids in ventral cranial shape only in ventral RW2 and RW3 scores. The borophagine Aelurodon was by far the closest to the hyaenids in ventral RW1 score (Fig. 6, Ael). The negative RW1 score corresponds to a widening palate and a more caudally positioned cheek dentition; this is associated with the different evolutionary direction toward hypercarnivory taken by Aelurodon compared to Borophagus. Whereas Borophagus evolved bone-cracking capability by adapting the upper P4 (and corresponding lower p4–m1) as a biomechanically favorable locus for durophagy, instead of the third premolar used by hyaenids (Werdelin 1989), Aelurodon and its sister genera showed increasing size in all of the premolars through their evolution (Wang et al. 1999). The latter trend is similar to that observed in hyaenids; accordingly, the caudal shift of the cheek dentition proceeded furthest in Aelurodon among borophagines. This may indicate increased reliance on anterior premolars for durophagy in Aelurodon relative to Borophagus. Even so, the caudal shift of Aelurodon’s
CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 483

484 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
 FIGURE 7. Evolutionary changes in cranial shape in borophagine canids (A–C) and hyaenids (D–F). Plots show dorsal (A,D), lateral (B,E), and ventral (C,F) cranial landmarks. Arrows indicate directions of evolutionary change. Illustrations in central column depict location of landmarks on the skull. Dorsal and ventral landmarks mirrored about mid-sagittal axis to aid interpretation.
palate is still far from the degree seen in the most derived hyaenids (Fig. 6). Again, the constraint of having posterior molars would have prevented further evolutionary changes toward more negative ventral RW1 scores from occurring in borophagines.
The morphological insights obtained from cranial shape analysis allow us to outline a more detailed history of shape evolution and the associated specialization in the two clades. Parallel evolutionary pathways in cranial shape were observed in the lateral and ventral shape analyses: ancestral borophagines and hyaenids had a short rostrum, an elongate but flat cranial region, more elongate dentition, and narrower palates (Figs. 5, 6). In dorsal view, the doglike hyaenids overlapped with most borophagine canids in having a moderately elongate rostrum and short temporal fossae (Fig. 3). Lateral and ventral cranial shape of doglike hyaenids evolved in parallel with their borophagine counterparts by gradual deepening of the skull, shortening of the rostrum,
elongation of the cranial region, doming of the forehead, and widening of the palate (Figs. 5, 6). Evolution of specialized bonecrackers largely continued this trend in lateral and ventral shape, but in dorsal shape the rostrum was further shortened only in derived hyaenids, and not borophagines (Fig. 4). These trends are summarized by vectors indicating directions of shape change through evolution, superimposed onto deformation grids (Fig. 7). The result of these morphological changes over time is that the P4 in borophagine canids and P3 in hyaenids are in approximately the same positions relative to the forehead and the temporomandibular joints (TMJ), providing mechanical advantage with which to efficiently produce large bite forces required in bone-cracking (Greaves 1983, 2000; Werdelin 1989).
Tests for correlation between cranial shape and size indicated that allometry did not play a major role in the shape changes observed in hyaenids (Table 4). This is true for borophagines as well, except for overall dorsal cranial

shape, which was significantly correlated with size (p , 0.0001). A basic explanation for an allometric trajectory of cranial shape evolution would be that the physical requirements of movement simply require different shapes to evolve at different body sizes (Gould 1966). In the case of mastication, proportionally larger muscle attachment areas with larger body size may be expected, for example, simply to maintain comparable force production in larger-bodied forms (e.g., to move heavier jaws, the required muscle force is proportional to muscle crosssection area, but mass is directly proportional to volume), regardless of whether those larger species have bone-cracking adaptations. However, dental specialization in canids toward hypercarnivory evolved in concert with enlarging body size (Van Valkenburgh et al. 2004), suggesting that larger species were also changing their ecology, perhaps under energetic constraint of their food choice (Carbone et al. 1999). Furthermore, size allometry is not significantly correlated with borophagine cranial shape other than in the dorsal shape analysis, suggesting that the majority of evolutionary changes in the borophagine skull are associated with other factors, namely functional demands. As discussed above, dorsal cranial shape in borophagines appears restricted in rostral length reduction as a product of phylogenetic constraint. Therefore, derived borophagines were not able to parallel hyaenids along dorsal RW1 toward more positive scores, effectively highlighting size allometry as a means of shape change instead (Fig. 4). The allometric trends show increasingly tubular dorsal skulls in larger borophagines (data not shown), which may be associated with resisting torsional forces that travel laterally across the skull. Such allometry does not characterize the Hyaenidae, however; the lack of significant correlations between cranial shape and size in hyaenids indicates that evolutionary shape changes were associated with selection and functional demands. This is further evidenced by the fact that hyaenid bone-crackers evolved toward more extreme RW1 scores (dorsal, lateral, and ventral) than any of the borophagines, a trend that is
associated with shortened rostrum and reduced dentition involving the evolutionary reduction and loss of the first and second upper molars (Werdelin and Solounias 1991).
A recent study on the cranial biomechanics of fossil canids demonstrated that the derived Epicyon and Borophagus possess bone-cracking capability far superior to that of living canines and fossil hesperocyonine canids (Tseng and Wang 2010). In light of our current findings, it would be interesting to further compare cranial biomechanics across fossil hyaenids and borophagines to see if parallel morphological pathways correspond with convergent biomechanics in derived as well as intermediate and ancestral forms. Bite force studies done on domestic canids with different cranial shapes showed significant correlation between brachycephalic skulls and higher bite force (Ellis et al. 2009); the patterns observed in this study suggest that a similar relationship might be expected for an evolutionary sequence of borophagines and hyaenids. In addition, one should also examine the borophagine Aelurodon to determine whether its skull biomechanics differ from Borophagus because of its premolar enlargement and more extreme caudal movement of the cheek dentition, both features closely approaching those observed in hyaenids. Along another line of inquiry, analysis of mandibular shape across a broader sample of carnivorans demonstrated that allometry is a main factor in determining corpus shape across fissiped families; Meloro et al. (2008) predicted that the mandibles of borophagine canids could adapt to hypercarnivory via allometry. In addition, the corresponding lower teeth (p4 and m1 in borophagines) that became adapted for durophagy may have evolved in close association with changes in mandibular shape, as observed in the evolution of the upper dentition with cranial shape. Whether or not the cranium and mandible of borophagine canids show similar adaptive pathways and constraint to specialization remains an interesting topic to be further explored. Beyond the skull, there is evidence from studies of borophagine postcranial functional morphology that indicates hunting techniques potentially quite different from those of modern hyenas
CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 485

486 ZHIJIE JACK TSENG AND XIAOMING WANG
 FIGURE 8. Expectations of patterns of convergence between two lineages through a two-dimensional morphospace (A–C), and observations made from the current study on borophagine canids and hyaenids (D–F). A, Two lineages starting with different morphologies evolved forms that converge in morphospace (arrows indicate directions of morphological evolution). B, Two lineages evolved toward each other in morphology, but do not overlap. C, Two lineages exhibit parallel pathways of morphological change and do not converge on each other in morphology. Results from this study are depicted for dorsal (D), lateral (E), and ventral (F) cranial shapes. The axes represent relative evolutionary differences between lineages in morphospace, and not absolute time. A–C modified from Stayton (2006). For D–F, squares represent stem borophagines, and circles represent stem hyaenids. In dorsal cranial shape, stem borophagines and hyaenids shared similar positions in morphospace, but hyaenids evolved a further reduced rostrum. In lateral cranial shape, all observed evolutionary changes in borophagines and hyaenids were parallel. In ventral shape, hyaenids and borophagines exhibited parallel changes of different extent, and derived borophagines overlapped with stem hyaenids.
(Andersson 2005), suggesting that current ecomorphological categories may not be defined with sufficient understanding of the organisms as a whole. How constraints in cranial shape evolution demonstrated here might interact with postcranial evolution is unclear, and future work should integrate these aspects to gain a fuller understanding of this ecomorphology and to better define such a prominent example of convergence.
Implications for Understanding Convergence.— Morphological convergence, being a broad and complex topic, can nevertheless be summarized by several scenarios of expected outcomes (Fig. 8). True morphological convergence occurs where two lineages, starting with divergent morphologies, evolved to become identical or overlapping in morphology (Fig. 8A). However, a converging trend
that does not end in overlapping morphologies can also exist, in theory (Fig. 8B). Finally, two lineages may be considered convergent if they evolved via parallel pathways of shape change, perhaps along a similar functional continuum (Fig. 8C). Stayton (2006) attempted to quantify differences between these scenarios by using mathematical means to distinguish between the first two cases. In reality, the boundaries between any of these scenarios may exist as continuums in themselves, making categorization difficult. Examination of evolutionary trends characterized by the RW axes in this study (Figs. 4–6) indicates that morphological evolution of borophagines and hyaenids is best described by largely parallel trends of change (Fig. 8C).
To demonstrate this, the overall evolutionary trends given by the different cranial shape analyses were simplified as in the theoretical scenarios (Fig. 8D–F). Dorsal shape evolution in borophagines overlapped with that of earlier hyaenids (Fig. 8D); however, borophagines did not evolve any further in shortening the rostrum. Derived, bone-cracking hyaenids were unique in this regard (Fig. 4). In lateral cranial shape, borophagines and hyaenids never converged, but evolved in parallel toward the bone-cracking ecomorphology (Figs. 5, 8E). In ventral cranial shape, parallel evolutionary pathways were also observed for the two lineages; however, borophagines never reached the extent hyaenids did in caudal movement of the dentition (Figs. 6, 8F). These representations of evolutionary trends show additional complexity in actual observations that may not be easily categorized, especially when pervasive phylogenetic constraint may be present in lineages undergoing a ‘‘macroevolutionary ratchet’’ model of specialization. Further studies of similar evolutionary cases may shed light on whether interaction between constraint and specialization could produce different outcomes than the ones seen here.
Limitations.—Geometric morphometrics analysis is a powerful technique that can be used to compare overall morphological shape within a sample of specimens, yielding a more informative comparison than isolated univariate or bivariate measurements (Zel-

ditch et al. 2004). However, the necessity of comparing homologous landmarks is a limitation in the analysis of incomplete specimens. The breadth of the skull across the zygomatic arches traditionally has been used as a measure of adductor muscle mass (Binder and Van Valkenburgh 2000; Tanner et al. 2010), and this information would have been informative in our shape analyses as to the evolutionary changes associated with masticatory musculature size. However, fossil specimens often have incompletely preserved zygomatic arches, and in our sample of fossil canids and hyaenids most are not well preserved (e.g., deformed or missing) in this regard. Therefore, we were constrained to dorsal and ventral landmarks that extend laterally only to the base of the zygomatic arches (Fig. 2). Multivariate calculations that estimate the position of missing landmarks have been proposed (Adams et al. 2004), but the objectivity of those methods and their influence on important functional landmarks, which could be used to interpret macroevolutionary trends, remain to be further evaluated.
Conclusion
We utilized geometric morphometrics analysis to study the evolution of cranial shape changes in fossil borophagine canids and hyaenids, two carnivoran groups that have converged multiple times in wolf-like and hyena-like ecomorphologies. Results showed parallel morphological pathways of change throughout their evolutionary histories, ending in specialized bone-cracking hypercarnivores. This pattern of parallel change was mediated by phylogenetic constraint in borophagines, limiting the amount of change possible in the shape and length of the rostrum. These and other findings indicate that although specialization of the bonecracking ecomorphology was limited in the extent of morphological change in borophagines, bone-cracking function was not necessarily compromised. Interaction between phylogenetic constraint and adaptive evolution may affect the subsequent evolutionary potential of lineages, but their mechanisms require more in depth study. On the other
hand, convergent ecomorphs may share similar functional capability evolved via identical pathways, even if their initial phylogenetic constraints differ. Differential effects of alternative functional ‘‘solutions’’ that arise during morphological evolution may be multiplied with processes of the ‘‘macroevolutionary ratchet’’ already in place to further limit the evolutionary pathways available to specialized lineages.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Galkin, J. Kelly, J. Meng, X. J. Ni, and M. Spaulding for help with and access to the American Museum of Natural History Frick Collection; S. Q. Chen and W. He for access to specimens in the Hezheng Paleozoology Museum; Z. X. Qiu for access to specimens in the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology; R. Purdy for access to National Museum of Natural History fossil specimens; J. Liu for help with data collection in the University of Alberta Museum of Zoology; J. Dines for help with data collection in the Department of Mammalogy, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County; E. Lacey and C. Conroy for access to Museum of Vertebrate Zoology specimens. G. Koufos provided information on Plioviverrops skulls and a photo of the most complete specimen; T. Rowe and Digimorph.org provided access to a 3-D reconstruction image of ‘Miacis’ cognitus; L. Werdelin provided discussion and helped track down references. J. X. Samuels and an anonymous reviewer provided constructive and detailed comments that greatly improved the structure and content of the manuscript. N. Atkins performed detailed copyediting on the final version of the manuscript. Research was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, a National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant (DEB-0909807), an American Museum Collection Study Grant, and a U.S. Fulbright Grant (to Z.J.T.).
Literature Cited
CANID AND HYAENID CONVERGENT EVOLUTION 487
