 PHYLOGENOMIC ANALYSIS OF TRANSCRIPTOME DATA ELUCIDATES CO-OCCURRENCE OF A PALEOPOLYPLOID EVENT AND THE ORIGIN OF BIMODAL KARYOTYPES IN AGAVOIDEAE (ASPARAGACEAE)1
MICHAEL R. MCKAIN2, NORMAN WICKETT3,7, YETING ZHANG3, SARAVANARAJ AYYAMPALAYAM2, W. RICHARD MCCOMBIE4, MARK W. CHASE5, J. CHRIS PIRES6, CLAUDE W. DEPAMPHILIS3, AND JIM LEEBENS-MACK2,8
2Department of Plant Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602 USA; 3Department of Biology, Intercollege Graduate Degree Program in Plant Biology, Institute of Molecular Evolutionary Genetics, Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802 USA; 4Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724 USA; 5Jodrell Laboratory, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3DS, UK; and 6Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211 USA
• Premise of the study: The stability of the bimodal karyotype found in Agave and closely related species has long interested botanists. The origin of the bimodal karyotype has been attributed to allopolyploidy, but this hypothesis has not been tested. Next-generation transcriptome sequence data were used to test whether a paleopolyploid event occurred on the same branch of the Agavoideae phylogenetic tree as the origin of the Yucca–Agave bimodal karyotype.
• Methods: Illumina RNA-seq data were generated for phylogenetically strategic species in Agavoideae. Paleopolyploidy was inferred in analyses of frequency plots for synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (Ks) between Hosta, Agave, and Chlorophytum paralogous and orthologous gene pairs. Phylogenies of gene families including paralogous genes for these species and outgroup species were estimated to place inferred paleopolyploid events on a species tree.
• Key results: Ks frequency plots suggested paleopolyploid events in the history of the genera Agave, Hosta, and Chlorophytum. Phylogenetic analyses of gene families estimated from transcriptome data revealed two polyploid events: one predating the last common ancestor of Agave and Hosta and one within the lineage leading to Chlorophytum.
• Conclusions: We found that polyploidy and the origin of the Yucca–Agave bimodal karyotype co-occur on the same lineage consistent with the hypothesis that the bimodal karyotype is a consequence of allopolyploidy. We discuss this and alternative mechanisms for the formation of the Yucca–Agave bimodal karyotype. More generally, we illustrate how the use of nextgeneration sequencing technology is a cost-efficient means for assessing genome evolution in nonmodel species.
Key words: Agavoideae; bimodal karyotype; next generation sequencing; paleopolyploidy.
Karyotypes with bimodal chromosome size distributions have been described for taxa throughout the monocotyledons (e.g., Bennett et al., 1992; Talavera et al., 1993; Gitaí et al., 2005). Whereas most karyotypes exhibit a continuous range of chromosome sizes, karyotypes of some taxa are bimodal, with chromosomes falling into two distinct size classes often described as S for small and L for large (n = S + L). Chromosome size bimodality has arisen multiple times within Asparagales
1 Manuscript received 12 November 2011; revision accepted 4 January 2012.
We thank E. Wafula (Penn State) for help with the transcriptome assembly. We are thankful for the comments of three anonymous reviewers that greatly improved this manuscript. We are also grateful to the National Science Foundation for support this research through Assembling the Tree of Life (DEB 0732818 and 0829868) grants to J.L.-M., C.W.D., and J.C.P. and a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant to M.R.M. and J.L.-M. The quality of the manuscript was greatly improved due to the suggestions of the editors of this special issue and anonymous reviewers.
7Present address: Chicago Botanic Garden, Glencoe, Illinois 60022 USA
8 Author for correspondence (e-mail: jleebensmack@plantbio.uga.edu) doi:10.3732/ajb.1100537
(Pires et al., 2006) including independent origins within Orchidaceae (Martínez, 1985; Giuseppina et al., 2010), Iridaceae (Goldblatt and Takei, 1997), Xanthorrhoeaceae (Taylor, 1925; Brandham and Doherty, 1998), Amaryllidaceae (Crosa, 2004) and Asparagaceae (McKelvey and Sax, 1933; Granick, 1944; Stedje, 1989). Bimodal karyotypes are most often limited to single genera (Goldblatt and Takei, 1997), small groups of closely related species (Stedje, 1996), or single species (Jones and Smith, 1967). However, bimodal chromosome size distributions are shared among multiple genera in Asphodeloideae (Xanthorrhoeaceae) and Agavoideae (Asparagaceae) (APG III, 2009; Chase et al., 2009). Within these subfamilies, bimodal karyotypes are synapomorphies for species-rich clades that may be millions of years old (Brandham and Doherty, 1998). For example, within the Asphodeloideae, Aloe, Astroloba, Gasteria, and Haworthia comprise ca. 689 species (Plant List, 2010) and all exhibit a karyotype of n = 4S + 3L (Brandham, 1971). A clade composed solely of these genera is highly supported (Treutlein et al., 2003), indicating that chromosome bimodality is a synapomorphy and the ancestral karyotype for the group is n = 4S + 3L. The mechanism for persistence of bimodal karyotypes over millions of generations is unknown (Brandham and Doherty, 1998).
American Journal of Botany 99(2): 397–406, 2012; http://www.amjbot.org/ © 2012 Botanical Society of America 397
American Journal of Botany 99(2): 397–406. 2012.

398 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 99
The clade defined as Agavaceae s.l. by Bogler et al. (2006) is composed of 15 genera and 377 species (Plant List, 2010) sharing bimodal karyotypes (Fig. 1). The APG III classification treats the group as an unnamed clade within Agavoideae, a subfamily of Asparagaceae (APG III, 2009; Chase et al., 2009). Here, we refer to this group as the Agavoideae bimodal karyotype clade or the ABK clade (Fig. 1). Within the ABK clade, 10 genera (~358 species) have a karyotype of n = 25S + 5L (Akemine, 1935; Tamura, 1995) (or some multiple of this based on ploidy) and five genera, Camassia Lindl., Chlorogalum (Lindl.) Kunth, Hastingsia, Schoenolirion Torr. Ex Durand, and Hesperocallis A. Gray, form a subclade of 19 species with bimodal karyotypes exhibiting varying numbers of large and small chromosomes (Gould, 1942; Cave, 1948; Sen, 1975; Fernández and Daviña, 1991; Tamura, 1995). A number of recent molecular phylogenetic analyses have placed Camassia Lindl., Chlorogalum (Lindl.) Kunth, and Hastingsia S.Watson, in a single clade (Bogler et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2008; Fishbein et al., 2010), and Schoenolirion Torr. ex Durand has long been associated with Camassia and Chlorogalum (e.g., Cronquist, 1981; Sherman and Beckling, 1991), although Halpin (2011) found support for placement of Schoenolirion outside of the CamassiaChlorogalum clade. Hesperocallis has recently been placed within the ABK clade (Pires et al., 2004a; Bogler et al., 2006), and whole plastome analyses place this monotypic genus in a clade with Camassia and Chlorogalum (M. R. McKain et al., unpublished manuscript).
Current analyses support Hosta Tratt., with a karyotype of n = 25S + 5L (Zonneveld and Iren, 2001), as sister to the rest of the ABK clade (Bogler and Simpson, 1996; Smith et al., 2008; Steele et al., 2012 [in this issue]; M. R. McKain et al., unpublished manuscript), suggesting that the “Yucca-Agave” karyotype (Whitaker, 1934; Sato, 1935), was ancestral for the ABK clade. Divergence from the ancestral 25S + 5L karyotype appears to have occurred only within the clade including Camassia, Chlorogalum, Hastingsia, Hesperocallis, and Schoenolirion.
Fig. 1. The currently accepted phylogeny of Agavoideae (Asparagaceae) with both APG II and APG III nomenclature. The gray box indicates the former Agavaceae (senus Bogler et al., 2006), which we define as the Agavoideae bimodal karyotype clade. The sister clade to the ABK clade includes the former Anthericaceae, Herreriaceae, and Behniaceae.
Otherwise, the “Yucca-Agave” karyotype has persisted throughout the ABK clade including within polyploid series where increases in ploidy coincide with proportionate gains in the number of small and large chromosomes (Robert et al., 2008).
Chromosome sizes are uniformly distributed in karyotypes for Agavoideae species outside of the ABK clade. Relationships within the sister clade to the ABK clade within Agavoideae remain elusive. Some studies place the genera Behnia Didr., Herreria Ruiz & Pav. and Herreriopsis H. Perrier within a clade sister to the former Anthericaceae sensu stricto. (Fig. 1; Chase et al., 1996, 2006; Wurdack and Dorr, 2009), whereas others place Behnia as sister to a clade including Herreria, Herreriopsis, and the former Anthericaceae s.s. (Bogler et al., 2006; Pires et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2010). Some of the species within the former Anthericaceae s.s form a well-supported group with base chromosome numbers of x = 7,8 (Cave, 1948; Baldwin and Speese, 1951; Palomino and Romo, 1988; Bjorå et al., 2008). Karyotype information for many of the species in Behnia, Herreria, and Herreriopsis is unavailable; however, one study did show that the chromosomes of Herreria salsaparilha Mart., n = 29, exhibit a uniform but broad size distribution (1.30–10.51 μm) suggestive of fusion–fission events and potentially polyploidy (Gonçalves et al., 2007). Anemarrhena asphodeloides Bunge is sister to all other members of Agavoideae (Bogler et al., 2006; Pires et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2010; Steele et al., 2012; M. R. McKain et al., unpublished manuscript), and its karyotype (n = 11) exhibits a continuous range of chromosomes sizes (Rudall et al., 1998).
Two processes have been hypothesized to give rise to bimodal chromosome size distributions. The first is chromosome rearrangement involving fusion-fission events (Schubert and Lysak, 2011), which has been hypothesized for bimodal karyotypes within Asparagales (Pires et al., 2006) and specifically for some members of the genus Ornithogalum (Asparagaceae, Scilloideae; Vosa, 1983, 2005). In these instances, large chromosomes could be the products of fusion between two smaller chromosomes, or the small chromosomes could be the result of the fission of large chromosomes. Such fusion–fission events have been attributed to genomic shock associated with an allopolyploid event (Wendel, 2000; Comai et al., 2003; Chen and Ni, 2006) followed by chromosomal rearrangements (e.g., Song et al., 1995; Pires et al., 2004b).
A second hypothesized mechanism for bimodal karyotype formation is allopolyploidy involving parental species of different chromosome sizes. In this case, chromosomes have remained distinct following hybridization, segregating independently in the allopolyploid. Genomic in situ hybridization has been used to elucidate this mechanism in the grass (Poaceae) species Milium montianum Parl. (Bennett et al., 1992). This study identified M. vernale M. Bieb., or a closely related species, and a second, unknown species as progenitors of M. montianum with the large chromosomes of the bimodal karyotype being identical in number and size to those of M. vernale. Chromosome bimodality in Asphodeloideae and Agavoideae has been suggested to have originated through this mechanism, although this hypothesis has not been tested in either case and parental species have not been identified (Brandham, 1983; Brandham and Doherty, 1998; Vosa, 2005; Pires et al., 2006).
In this study, we used next-generation sequencing technology to sequence transcriptomes of strategically placed members of Agavoideae and test the hypothesis that the origin of chromosomal bimodality in this group coincides with a polyploid event. Numerous studies have evaluated divergence
 
February 2012] MCKAIN ET AL.—PALEOPOLYPLOIDY IN AGAVOIDEAE 399
between duplicate genes as measured by the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (Ks) to identify whole genome duplications (i.e., polyploidy events) (Lynch and Conery, 2000; Blanc and Wolfe, 2004; Schlueter et al., 2004; Cui et al., 2006; Barker et al., 2008, 2009; Jiao et al., 2011) and concluded that genome duplications have been common throughout angiosperm evolution (Blanc and Wolfe, 2004; Schlueter et al., 2004; Cui et al., 2006; Soltis et al., 2009; Jiao et al., 2011; Van de Peer, 2011). Building on the approach of Jiao et al. (2011), we combined analyses of Ks plots and gene family phylogenies to test whether the origin of the bimodal karyotype on the lineage leading to the Agavoideae bimodal karyotype (ABK) clade is associated with a whole-genome duplication. In addition, the influence of polyploidy on the early diversification of the ABK clade is considered.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Taxon sampling—The taxonomy of families in “core Asparagales” including the clade investigated in this study has changed in recent years with the publication of APG II (2003) and APG III (2009). APG II included Agavaceae, Anemarrhenaceae, Anthericaeae, Behniaceae, and Herreriaceae (see Dahlgren et al., 1985) within Agavaceae, which was identified as an optional “bracketed” family within a broadly defined Asparagaceae. APG III (2009) abandoned the concept of bracketed families and applied the subfamilial classification Agavoideae (APG III, 2009; Chase et al., 2009). To simplify description of our sampling strategy, here we refer to the Agavoideae bimodal karyotype clade (ABK clade) (Fig. 1) to describe the clade that Bogler et al. (2006) named Agavaceae s.l. The ABK clade includes all descendants of the last common ancestor of Hosta and Agave L.: Agave, Beschorneria Kunth, Camassia, Chlorogalum, Furcraea Vent., Hastingsia, Hesperaloe Engelm. in S.Watson, Hesperoyucca (Engelm.) Trel., Hesperocallis, Hosta, Manfreda Salisb., Polianthes L., Prochnyanthes S.Watson, Schoenolirion, and Yucca L. On the basis of current phylogenetic analyses, Hosta is sister to the rest of Agavaceae (Givnish et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2008, Steele et al., 2012; M. R. McKain et al., unpublished manuscript) (Fig. 1). Therefore, within the ABK clade we generated transcriptome data for the diploid Hosta venusta F. Maek. (n = 25S + 5L) (Zonneveld and Iren, 2001) and analyzed available EST data for Agave tequilana F.A.C Weber (Simpson et al., 2011), also a diploid. Transcriptome data were also generated for Chlorophytum rhizopendulum Bjorå & Hemp (Agavoideae, classically placed in polyphyletic Anthericaceae) as an exemplar for the sister clade to the ABK clade (Fig. 1). Outside Agavoideae, transcriptome data were compiled for Asparagus officinalis L. (Asparagaceae) and Leochilus labiatus (Sw.) Kuntze (Orchidaceae) and combined with publically available EST data for Allium cepa L. (Amaryllidaceae) to root and identify ABK + Chlorophytum clades within gene trees.
RNA isolation and sequencing—RNA was isolated from fresh apical meristematic tissue or very young leaves using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, California, USA). All samples were kept on liquid nitrogen prior to RNA isolation. The optional step of heating the lysis solution to 65°C was used to maximize RNA yield. RNA was eluted into a final volume of 100 μL RNasefree water.
Total mass of RNA and quality was estimated using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, California, USA). Samples were deemed acceptable if RIN scores were greater than 8.0. A minimum of 20 μg of total RNA was required for library building and sequencing.
RNA-seq (Wang et al., 2009) paired-end libraries with average fragment lengths of 250 base pairs (bp) were constructed, and each library was sequenced on a single lane of an Illumina GAIIX sequencer flow cell (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA) at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory to generate a minimum of 3 gigabases of 75 bp, paired-end sequences. Fastq sequence files for each taxon have been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database at NCBI (SRA study SRP009920).
Transcriptome assembly—Illumina sequences were assembled using the CLC Genomics Workbench (CLC bio, Aarhus, Denmark). Prior to assembly, reads were trimmed to remove low quality ends, and trimmed reads shorter than 15 bp were discarded. Reads that passed the posttrimming length filter were then assembled using the default settings for de novo assembly, keeping only those
contigs greater than 200 bp. Assemblies have been placed in a web-based searchable database (http://asparagalesdb.uga.edu).
Ks plot estimation—Ks frequency plots were used to initially detect potential whole genome duplication (WGD) events and then to compare their origin to divergence of lineages within the ABK + Chlorophytum clade. Whereas studies attempting to identify more ancient genome duplications have assessed neutral sequence divergence based on transversions at 4-fold degenerate sites (4DTv; e.g., Tuskan et al., 2006), we were focused on divergence following gene duplication (paralogs) or speciation (orthologs) events within Agavoideae over the last 50 million years (Good-Avila et al., 2006). Therefore, in this study, Ks was used as a measure of neutral sequence divergence (e.g., Lynch and Conery, 2000; Blanc and Wolfe, 2004; Schlueter et al., 2004; Cui et al., 2006; Barker et al., 2008, 2009; Jiao et al., 2011). All-by-all BLASTN searches were performed, and paralogous and orthologous pairs were identified as best matches within and between species, respectively. Paralog and putative ortholog matches with minimum alignment lengths of 300 bp and at least a 40% identity were analyzed further. These cutoffs were used to provide a minimum of 100 codons for alignments used in the estimation of the number synonymous substitutions per synonymous sites (Ks). Amino acid sequences were estimated for these homologs using the program ESTscan (Iseli et al., 1999; Lottaz et al., 2003), and paired peptide sequences (orthologs or paralogs) were aligned using the program MUSCLE v3.7 (Edgar, 2004). Nucleotide sequences were then forced onto the amino acid alignments by codons (Cui et al., 2006; Suyama et al., 2006). Pairwise Ks values were then calculated for each homolog pair using codeml within the PAML 4 package (Yang, 2007) paired sequence settings (yn00; Yang and Nielsen, 2000) and the F3 × 4 model (Goldman and Yang, 1994) for estimating codon frequencies.
Ks values were normalized for among-species differences in synonymous substitution rates for Agave, Hosta, and Chlorophytum genes to compare Ks plots for putative paralog pairs within each species and for putative orthologs between species. Putatively single-copy genes were analyzed to estimate among-species variation in nuclear gene substitution rates. Ortholog sets for 49 single-copy genes were identified in the Agave, Hosta, Chlorophytum, Asparagus, Allium, and Leochilus transcriptome assemblies using blastx searches against a database of 970 genes inferred to be single-copy in sequenced angiosperm genomes (Wall et al., 2008; Duarte et al., 2010). Nucleotide sequences for transcripts were translated, and the amino acid sequences for each ortholog set were aligned using MUSCLE v3.7 (Edgar, 2004). Nucleotide coding sequences were then aligned to amino acid sequences using the program PAL2NAL v13 (Suyama et al., 2006). The resulting codon alignments were combined in a 56 372 column supermatrix, and a species tree was estimated using the GTR-gamma model implemented in RAxML v7.0.4 (Stamatakis, 2006). The estimated tree matched previously inferred relationships (Steele et al., 2012) (Fig. 2). Ks was estimated for each branch on the species tree using codeml (Yang, 1998; Yang and Nielsen, 1998). The cumulative Ks value for branches leading from the last common ancestor (LCA) of Chlorophytum and the ABK clade to the tips was lowest for Hosta (Fig. 2). These LCAs to tip Ks values estimated on the single-copy gene supermatrix were used to make relative rate corrections of Ks values for Agave and Chlorophytum paralog-pairs. Corrections were calculated by multiplying uncorrected Agave and Chlorophytum putative paralog pair Ks values by the ratio of Hosta/Agave or Hosta/Chlorophytum LCA to tip Ks values derived from the single-copy gene analysis (Cui et al., 2006). Similarly, Ks values for putative orthologs for each species pair were also normalized for differences in species-specific rates.
After normalization of the Ks values, frequency distributions for Ks values between 0.0 and 2.0 were plotted for putative paralogs within species and putative orthologs between each species pair. Only Ks values less than 2.0 were included in the plots because Ks estimates for more divergent gene pairs may be affected by saturation of substitution at synonymous sites.
Multivariate normal components were fit to the resulting Ks frequency distributions using the mixture model test implemented in the program EMMIX (McLachlan et al., 1999; http://www.maths.uq.edu.au/~gjm/emmix/emmix.html). The optimal number of components in the mixture model was identified using the Bayesian information criterion (BIC), and components were interpreted in terms of genome-scale duplication events and background single-gene duplications.
Gene family circumscription and phylogeny estimation—Timing of WGD events relative to speciation events was deduced by comparing gene tree topologies to a species tree for taxa represented in each gene tree. Transcriptome assemblies for H. venusta, A. tequilana, C. rhizopendulum, A. officinalis, A. cepa, and L. labiatus were filtered using a cut-off of 300 bp and then translated using the program TransPipe (Barker et al., 2010). Gene family circumscriptions were estimated by clustering of inferred amino acid sequences using the

400
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 99
 Fig. 2.
trix analysis of putatively single-copy genes (Duarte et al., 2010) extracted from transcriptome data. All nodes have 100% bootstrap values and branch lengths are represented by Ks values. The hypothesized timings of genome duplication with the Agavoideae are marked as H1, H2, and H3 (see Methods).
program OrthoMCL v2.0 (Li et al., 2003) with suggested parameter settings. Gene family clusters were selected for gene tree estimation based on the results of Ks plot analyses of paralogs for Hosta, Agave, and Chlorophytum. To test our interpretation of the Ks plots, gene tree analyses focused on gene families with gene pairs having Ks values corresponding to paralog peaks in estimated frequency plots (Fig. 3). These gene family clusters included paralog pairs with Ks values between 0.1 and 0.3 for H. venusta and A. tequilana, and between 0.15 and 0.4 for C. rhizopendulum. When genes in paralog pairs were found in separate OrthoMCL clusters, the two clusters were combined for alignment and gene tree estimation.
Peptide sequences within each family were aligned using MUSCLE v3.7, and nucleotide sequences were aligned onto the amino acid alignments using PAL2NAL v13. Gappy alignments were filtered using two criteria. Columns in each alignment were removed if gaps were observed in more than 90% of the sequences (rows). Second, transcript assemblies (rows) were deleted if they covered less than 30% of the multiple sequence alignment’s total length. Gene trees were estimated using RAxML v7.0.4 with the GTR + gamma evolutionary model and 500 bootstrap replicates. Gene trees were rooted using unigenes from the sampled outgroup taxa (Leochilus, Allium, or Asparagus) found in each orthogroup.
Timing of gene duplication events relative to the origin of the ABK clade and divergence of lineages leading to ABK clade and Chlorophytum rhizopendulum were assessed by querying estimated gene trees for the last common ancestor of focal paralog pairs and their descendant genes using in-house perl scripts (available upon request). As described above, focus was placed on paralog pairs with Ks values corresponding to hypothesized genome duplication events (Fig. 3). Gene tree topologies were inspected to determine whether individual duplication events occurred before divergence of the ABK clade and Chlorophytum rhizopendulum (H1), on the branch leading to the ABK clade (H2), on the branch leading to Chlorophytum (H3) or elsewhere on the species tree. For example, the LCA of each Hosta and Agave paralog pair with Ks values between 0.1 and 0.3 were identified in rooted gene trees. If a Chlorophytum gene is observed within a clade defined by a paralog pair LCA, then the duplication event was inferred to have occurred before divergence of Chlorophytum and the ABK clade. Alternatively, if Chlorophytum unigenes were placed as sister to a clade defined by the LCA of a focal paralog pair, the duplication event was inferred as having occurred after divergence of Chlorophytum and the ABK clade. Bootstrap percentages for the clade defined by the last common ancestor of a focal paralog pair were used to assess confidence in the inferred
timing of duplication events relative to speciation events. The same approach was used to estimate the timing of Chlorophytum gene duplications relative to divergence of Chlorophytum and the ABK clade. Gene tree topologies were also inspected manually to check the results of automated gene tree queries.
RESULTS
Assemblies—Assembly contig counts and lengths are shown in Table 1 for all contigs and successfully translated contigs (as estimated with TransPipe (Barker et al., 2010)). All successful translations were used for gene family analyses.
Ks analyses of duplicate pairs—Two paleopolyploid events were inferred from analyses of rate-normalized Ks values for comparisons of H. venusta, A. tequilana, and C. rhizopendulum homolog pairs (Fig. 3). An analysis of 49 single-copy genes in a supermatrix of 56 372 base pairs was used to estimate relative silent site substitution rates on branches leading to H. venusta, A. tequilana, and C. rhizopendulum. Ks values for branches leading to Agave, Hosta, and Chlorophytum from their most recent common ancestor were 0.174, 0.159, and 0.410, respectively. To compare the Ks frequency plots, Ks values for Agave and Chlorophytum were normalized by multiplying raw values by relative rate ratios of 0.915 and 0.389, respectively. Correction factors of 0.955 and 0.578 were applied to Ks values of putatively orthologous Agave/Hosta and Chlorophytum/Hosta gene pairs, respectively, to account for differences in synonymous substitution rates on lineages leading to each species.
After applying rate corrections, maximum Ks values for para-
log pairs were 77.49, 136.41, and 52.04 for H. venusta, A. tequi-
lana, and C. rhizopendulum, respectively, but to avoid effects
of saturation, paralog pairs with Ks values over 2.0 were not
included in frequency plots (Fig. 3). Ks frequency plots include
437 gene duplicates for H. venusta, 2374 for A. tequilana, and
1704 for C. rhizopendulum. For comparison, uncorrected K s
frequency plots can be found in Appendix S1 (see Supplemen-
tal Data with the online version of this article). Due to its place-
ment as the sister to the rest of the ABK clade (Fig. 1), putative
ortholog sets including Hosta are most informative for under-
standing the timing of gene duplications relative to the origin of
the ABK clade. After correction, K values for cross-species s
homolog pairs ranged from 0.0 to 113.54 for Hosta/Agave and 0.0 to 46.48 for Hosta/Chlorophytum gene pairs. Ks plots for putative ortholog pairs with Ks values less than 2.0 included 1656 Hosta-Agave ortholog pairs and 3639 Hosta-Chlorophytum ortholog pairs (Fig. 3D).
Mixture model analyses reveal distinct components in the K s
frequency plots that we interpret as background single-gene duplications or polyploidy associated duplication events. The Bayesian
TABLE 1. Contigs statistics for transcriptome assemblies of six study species including the filtered counts.
The maximum likelihood species tree derived from a superma-
  Species
Agave tequilana
Hosta venusta
Chlorophytum rhizopendulum Allium cepa
Asparagus officinalis Leochilus labiatus
Contig total
12 972 57 423 58 766 12 990
107 254 43 860
Contigs >300 bp
12 972 19 054 33 369
8992 62 708 18 316
Contigs >500 bp
11 087 3076 19 770 6683 43 093 8073
Contigs in gene family trees
9052
9810 19 879 8992 31 431 10 947
  
February 2012] MCKAIN ET AL.—PALEOPOLYPLOIDY IN AGAVOIDEAE 401
 Fig. 3. Normalized Ks frequency plots (corrected for rate variation; see Results) for paralogous and orthologous gene pairs from Hosta venusta, Agave tequilana, and Chlorophytum rhizopendulum derived from transcriptome data. Ks distribution components estimated using EMMIX (see Methods) are superimposed on histogram for each paralog-pair Ks plot (A–C). These components are hypothesized to represent background gene duplications (blue), gene duplications associated with polyploidy events (green), alleles or sequencing errors that resulted in assembly of distinct unigenes with high sequence identity (red), and older gene duplications in the A. tequliana genome (purple; see Results). (A) H. venusta and (B) A. tequliana paralog plots include secondary peaks (green lines) with modal Ks value indicative of a whole genome duplication event at Ks = 0.2. The C. rhizopendulum paralog plot (C) shows a secondary peak with a mode at Ks = 0.25. (D) The Ks distribution for H. venusta paralogs (solid line) exhibits a mode between modal Ks values for putative Hosta–Agave (Ks = 1.0) and Hosta–Chlorophyutm (Ks = 0.25) orthologs.
information criterion (BIC) was used to choose the optimal number of normal distributions that fit data for each Ks plot based on the EMMIX output. The component with the smallest Ks values was interpreted as the background duplication. Ks frequency plots estimated from Hosta and Agave paralog pairs show a concentration of paralog pairs with modal Ks value around 0.2 (green lines in Fig. 3A and 3B, respectively). A slightly larger mode of 0.25 is seen in Chlorophytum Ks plot (green line in Fig. 3C). These peaks in the Ks distributions for all three species are suggestive of whole genome duplication events (WGD). The larger Ks value for the hypothesized duplication events in C. rhizopendulum may indicate an older but independent WGD on the branch leading to C. rhizopendulum (H3) or possibly a WGD on the lineage leading to the last common ancestor of Chlorophytum and members of the ABK clade (H1). Gene tree analyses were used to evaluate each of these alternative hypotheses (see below).
Ks frequency plots include at least one component representing ongoing single-gene duplication events (Fig. 3A–3C; denoted
by blue lines). Agave and Chlorophytum Ks plots also show a population of putative paralog pairs with a normal distribution centered around Ks of ~0.025 (Fig. 3B, 3C; denoted by red lines). These components may represent pairs of alleles or sequencing errors that resulted in assembly of distinct unigenes with high sequence identity. When they are less common, such unigene pairs are typically combined with background duplication pairs in a single component (e.g., Fig. 3A). A separate lowKs component in Chlorophytum Ks distribution was found only after the relative-rate correction increased the number of unigene pairs with the lowest Ks values (0.0–0.025) (compare Fig. 3 and Appendix S1). EMMIX identified a fourth component in the Agave Ks distribution centered on Ks ~0.5 (Fig. 3B; denoted by the purple line). This group of paralog pairs may represent a second, older WGD event that was not detected in the Hosta Ks distribution. Alternatively, background gene duplications may have been split into multiple components.
The corrected Ks frequency plot for Hosta–Agave and Hosta– Chlorophytum homolog pairs show peaks of 0.1 and 0.25,

402 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY [Vol. 99
respectively (Fig. 3D). Using normalized Ks values as a proxy for time, these values suggest that the polyploid event inferred from the Hosta and Agave paralog pairs (Ks ~0.20) occurred before divergence of lineages leading to Hosta and Agave and after divergence of the ABK clade and Chlorophytum (Ks ~0.25; Fig. 3D). It is important to note, however, that if this was an allopolyploid event, the estimated relative age of peaks in the paralog plots for the ABK clade would reflect timing of divergence of the parental species involved in the event rather than the actual WGD event (Doyle and Egan, 2010). This would not, however, affect our interpretation that the polyploid event occurred just before divergence of Hosta and Agave.
The peak in the Chlorophytum paralog Ks distribution described above, with a mode of 0.25 (Fig. 3C), largely overlaps the putative Hosta–Chlorophytum ortholog peak (Fig. 3D; Ks ~0.25), suggesting that the divergence of Chlorophytum and the ABK clade lineages occurred just before (H1) or after (H3) the WGD inferred from the Chlorophytum Ks plot. If H1 is correct, the paleopolyploid event in a common ancestor of the ABK clade and Chlorophytum may be masked by the later event (H2) inferred from the Hosta and Agave Ks plots. We analyzed nuclear gene trees to more rigorously characterize the timing of gene and genome duplications relative to speciation events in Agavoideae.
Phylogenetic analysis of gene families—To further elucidate the timing of polyploidy in the species sequenced here, we conducted phylogenetic analyses of gene families that included the duplicated genes identified in the Ks analyses described above. A total of 12724 putative gene families were circumscribed through OrthoMCL clustering of the transcripts assembled for the six species included in this study. We focused on OrthoMCL clusters containing H. venusta, A. tequilana, or C. rhizopendulum paralog pairs with Ks falling under the peaks interpreted as representing paleopolyploid events. These included 288, 1047, and 789 paralog pairs for H. venusta, A. tequilana, and C. rhizopendulum, respectively. Genes were placed in separate OrthoMCL clusters for 81 of the 2124 paralog pairs considered. In these cases, the two OrthoMCL clusters were combined before conducting phylogenetic analyses. After combining these clusters, gene sets that did not contain at least three species were removed from further consideration. The 2124 paralog pairs identified in H. venusta, A. tequilana, and C. rhizopendulum were distributed among 555 OrthoMCL gene sets that were aligned for gene tree estimation. All 555 alignments and ML gene trees have been deposited in the DRYAD database (http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.7pg045t2).
Relationships of genes within RAxML gene trees were analyzed within the context of species relationships (Fig. 2) to assess the placement of paleopolyploid events inferred from the ABK clade and Chlorophytum Ks frequency plots. The species tree estimated from a supermatrix analysis of 49 putatively single-copy nuclear genes (Fig. 2) is fully consistent with relationships inferred from analyses of plastid genes (Steele et al., 2012) and is supported with bootstrap percentages of 100% at all nodes.
We queried gene tree topologies to determine whether gene trees supported duplication events on the branch leading to the last common ancestors of the ABK clade and Chlorophytum (H1), the branch leading to the ABK clade after divergence from Chlorophytum (H2) or the branch leading to Chlorophytum (H3) (Fig. 2). These hypotheses are not mutually exclusive because the WGDs inferred through inspection of the Ks frequency plots could represent multiple events with homeologous gene pairs that have
overlapping Ks distributions. Since our primary interest was in testing whether the origin of the Yucca–Agave bimodal karyotype coincided with a polyploid event, characterization of possible genome duplication events in our outgroup lineages or predating divergence of Agavoideae (including Agave, Hosta, and Chlorophytum) and the lineage leading to Asparagus (the closest outgroup used here) were outside the scope of this study. Trees were disregarded when one or more outgroup transcripts were nested within the Agavoideae paralog clade, while other outgroup transcripts rooted the clade including Agavoideae paralog pairs. These trees could reflect artifacts due to poor alignment or sparse gene sampling or duplication events predating divergence of the outgroup and ingroup (Agavoideae) taxa.
Of 555 gene trees that passed our filtering steps, 183 were informative for testing our hypotheses concerning phylogenetic placement of WGD events (i.e., >50% bootstrap support duplication events concordant with H1, H2, or H2). Of these, 102 trees contained paralog pairs from either Hosta or Agave that were used to evaluate support for H1 or H2. There were 81 trees that contained paralog pairs from Chlorophytum, and these were used to evaluate support for H1 or H3. Bootstrap percentages (BP) supporting clades defined by the most recent common ancestor of duplicate genes included in focal paralog pairs were used to evaluate the degree of support for one of the three hypotheses being considered. Trees were classified as providing 50–80 BP support or greater than 80 BP support for a given hypothesis.
Gene family trees that contained either Hosta or Agave paralog pairs showed clear evidence for an Agavaceae-specific ancestral WGD event. Of 102 informative trees, 54 exhibited greater than 80 BP support for H2, and another 30 had at least 50 BP for gene duplication after divergence of Chlorophytum and ABK clade genes (Fig. 4A). There were 18 trees that suggested gene duplication before the divergence of Chlorophytum and the ABK clade (consistent with H1), 13 of these with greater than 80 BP support.
Chlorophytum paralog pairs found in 81 gene trees showed clear support for duplication events after divergence of the ABK clade and Chlorophytum-lineage (H3; Fig. 4B). There were 52 trees that supported H3 with at least 80 BP and another 19 with at least 50 BP. Gene duplications on the lineage leading to Chlorophytum and the ABK clade (H1) were seen in 10 trees, 8 with at least 80 BP. In sum, we interpret these results as favoring two separate WGD events in the lineages leading to the ABK clade and Chlorophytum. Whereas a bimodal karyotype is associated with the WGD on the lineage leading to the ABK clade, bimodal karyotypes have not been reported in Chlorophytum or related taxa within Anthericaceae (Chase et al., 1996), Behniaceae, or Herreriaceae sensu APG II (2003).
DISCUSSION
Polyploidy is a ubiquitous and recurring phenomenon in angiosperms, and a recent study by Jiao et al. (2011) demonstrated that all flowering plants share at least two ancestral whole genome duplications events. Detection of ancient polyploid events can be difficult as characteristics of recent polyploids, such as doubled chromosome number or genome size, are typically lost over time (Devos et al., 2002; Leitch and Bennet, 2004), often rapidly (e.g., Song et al., 1995). Ks analyses have been used to characterize ancient polyploidization in a number of taxa (Blanc and Wolfe, 2004; Schlueter et al., 2004; Cui et al., 2006; Barker et al., 2008, 2009; Shi et al., 2010; Jiao et al.,

February 2012]
MCKAIN ET AL.—PALEOPOLYPLOIDY IN AGAVOIDEAE 403
 Fig. 4.
gene tree topologies suggest genome-wide duplications on the branches leading to the ABK clade (H2) and Chlorophytum (H3). Histograms are shown for duplications observed in gene trees including (A) A. tequilana and H. venusta paralog pairs, and (B) C. rhizopendulum paralog pairs.
2011). Peaks observed in Ks plots have been interpreted in the context of species relationships in an effort to identify shared and independent polyploid events and their evolutionary implications. However, interpretation of cross-species comparisons of Ks plots are complicated by the fact that substitution rates may vary among lineages. Previous work has shown that with sufficient taxon sampling, analyses of gene trees can resolve the relative timing of hypothesized paleopolyploidy in the face of variable substitution rates (Pfeil et al., 2005; Cui et al., 2006; Barker et al., 2008, 2009, Jiao et al., 2011). In this study, Ks analyses of Agave, Hosta, and Chlorophytum transcriptomes revealed evidence of paleopolyploidy, but timing of one or more WGD events was unclear based on Ks plots alone. We resolved this uncertainty through phylogenetic analysis of gene families including paralog pairs hypothesized to represent WGD events. These analyses confirmed the existence of two paleopolyploidizations within Agavoideae, one on the branch leading to the ABK and another within the Chlorophytum lineage. As has been seen in previous studies (Pfeil et al., 2005; Cui et al., 2006; Barker et al., 2008, 2009), variation in substitution rates among lineages led to ambiguity in interpretation of cross-species comparisons of analysis of uncorrected Ks plots (Appendix S1). A relative rate correction was applied to Ks values in an effort to resolve this ambiguity, but analysis of gene tree topologies provided the clearest evidence for timing of gene duplications relative to speciation events.
Phylogenetic analysis of gene families constructed from the six study species supported a WGD event having occurred on the same branch as the origin of the Yucca–Agave bimodal karyotype, which was first described over a century ago (reviewed
in Whitaker, 1934; Sato, 1935; Granick, 1944) (H2; Fig. 3A). In addition, gene trees constructed with Chlorophytum paralog pairs showed support for a second Chlorophytum-specific WGD event (H3, Fig. 3B). Gene duplications were also evident on the branch leading to the last common ancestor of Agave, Hosta, and Chlorophytum, but these were much less common than duplications on branches leading either to the ABK clade or Chlorophytum (Fig. 4).
Determining relationships of taxa, including genera, within Agavoideae has been a long-standing problem in plant systematics. The use of molecular markers in both the nuclear and plastid genomes have yielded strong support for monophyly of ABK clade but not for relationships between genera within the group (Eguiarte et al., 1994, 2000; Bogler and Simpson, 1995, 1996; Pires et al., 2004a; Bogler et al., 2006). Phylogenetic analysis of whole plastid genome alignments has resulted in a well-resolved tree with high support (M. R. McKain et al., unpublished manuscript), but short internodes separating basal nodes in the ABK clade suggest that the group diversified rapidly after its origin. The process of diploidization, including gene loss (i.e., fractionation; Freeling, 2009), following polyploidization can spur reproductive isolation and speciation (Werth and Windham, 1991; Lynch and Force, 2000; Taylor et al., 2001; Scannell et al., 2006). This process has been hypothesized as a driver of angiosperm diversification (Soltis et al., 2009). Ecological factors, including range expansion, colonization of arid habitats, and plant-pollinator interactions, are thought to have contributed to diversification of the ABK clade (Good-Avila et al., 2006), but loss of alternate homeologs following polyploidization—a special case of the Bateson–Dobzhansky–Muller speciation model (Orr, 1996)—may have also played a role in the early radiation within the ABK clade, as has been hypothesized for Saccharomyces (Scannell et al., 2006).
In this context, it is noteworthy that Ks values for hypothesized Agave and Hosta homeologs (~0.2; Fig. 3A, 3B) are significantly greater than those for putative orthologs (~0.1; Fig. 3D), which may be due to a gap between polyploidization and the inferred radiation in the early history of the ABK clade. Alternatively, if the radiation was spurred by an allopolyploid event, large differences between ABK clade paralog and ortholog Ks values (Fig. 3) may be due to divergence between parental genomes before hybridization.
Distinguishing between autopolyploidy and allopolyploidy, especially in ancient polyploid events, can be quite difficult and at times impossible (Doyle and Egan, 2010). Here, we have demonstrated that a paleopolyploid event occurred on the lineage leading to the ABK clade after the divergence of the Chlorophytum clade, consistent with the hypothesis that the Yucca–Agave bimodal karyotype originated with an allopolyploid event. If the last common ancestor of the ABK clade was in fact an allopolyploid, however, the progenitor species seem to be extinct, and it is not possible to definitively distinguish between autopolyploidy and allopolyploidy through gene tree analyses (Doyle and Egan, 2010). Future work will test whether homeologous gene pairs are consistently segregating on small and large chromosomes as would be expected if the last common ancestor of the ABK clade was an allopolyploid hybrid of now extinct parental species with small and large chromosomes.
The origin of chromosome bimodality in Agavoideae has been under investigation since the Yucca–Agave karyotype was first described, and the 5L + 25S karyotype has long been viewed as diagnostic for evolutionary affiliations with
Total counts for duplication events in Agavoideae inferred from

404 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF BOTANY
[Vol. 99
Yucca and Agave (e.g., Hosta; Whitaker, 1934). When combined with embryological and other morphological characters, cytogenetic analyses led Cave (1948) to posit that Hesperocallis with four large, two medium, and 18 small chromosomes is allied with Hosta, Yucca, and Agave, a hypothesis that would gain molecular support 60 years later (Pires et al., 2004a). The objective of this study was to test whether a paleopolyploid event was associated with the origin of the 5L + 25S karyotype. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that the last common ancestor of the ABK clade was an allopolyploid. While the bimodal karyotype is suggestive of allopolyploidy, the possibility of chromosomal fusion and fission cannot be discounted.
The utility of next-generation sequencing for gaining insight into the genomes and evolutionary history of nonmodel species is obvious. The next-generation sequence data presented here allowed us to assess the plausibility of a long-standing hypothesis that relates the origin of chromosome bimodality to polyploidy. This work will aid in understanding the evolution of Agavoideae while providing an improved framework for future phylogenetic, ecological, and crop improvement studies. There is also great potential for investigating bimodal karyotypes across Asparagales and their implications for understanding causes and consequences of polyploidy.
LITERATURE CITED
