  Negative Frequency-Dependent Selection of Sexually Antagonistic Alleles in Myodes glareolus
Mikael Mokkonen et al.
Science 334, 972 (2011);
DOI: 10.1126/science.1208708
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.
   If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by clicking here.
Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines here.
The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of June 8, 2012 ):
Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6058/972.full.html
Supporting Online Material can be found at: http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2011/11/16/334.6058.972.DC1.html
A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6058/972.full.html#related
This article cites 27 articles, 6 of which can be accessed free: http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6058/972.full.html#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see: http://www.sciencemag.org/content/334/6058/972.full.html#related-urls
This article appears in the following subject collections: Evolution http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/evolution
 Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2011 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012

 REPORTS
Negative Frequency-Dependent Selection of Sexually Antagonistic
Alleles in Myodes glareolus
Mikael Mokkonen,1* Hanna Kokko,2 Esa Koskela,3 Jussi Lehtonen,2,4 Tapio Mappes,1
Henna Martiskainen,3 Suzanne C. Mills5
Sexually antagonistic genetic variation, where optimal values of traits are sex-dependent, is known to slow the loss of genetic variance associated with directional selection on fitness-related traits. However, sexual antagonism alone is not sufficient to maintain variation indefinitely. Selection of rare forms within the sexes can help to conserve genotypic diversity. We combined theoretical models and a field experiment with Myodes glareolus to show that negative frequency-dependent selection on male dominance maintains variation in sexually antagonistic alleles. In our experiment, high-dominance male bank voles were found to have low-fecundity sisters, and vice versa. These results show that investigations of sexually antagonistic traits should take into account the effects
of social interactions on the interplay between ecology and evolution, and that investigations of genetic variation should not be conducted solely under laboratory conditions.
shown that testosterone is under sexual and SA selection and is the most important determinant of dominance in male-male competition (20–22). This hormone also affects a variety of evolutionarily important processes such as spermatogenesis (23), immune function (24, 25), and secondary sex trait growth (26).
A haploid model with intralocus sexual conflict has shown that genetic variation can be maintained if the antagonism is sufficiently “balanced”—that is, if the relative fitness differences within males and females are of similar magnitude (27). This can lead to cyclic dynamics of morph frequency (28) or a protected polymorphism (29) where allele frequencies are roughly invariant over time. The maintenance of polymorphisms can be facilitated if the SA alleles are sex-linked (16), or if the fitness costs of SA alleles are nearly neutral when averaged between sexes and over their lifetimes (30). If we assume additional negative effects for each competitive type as their frequency becomes stronger, maintaining SA genetic variation becomes considerably easier.
Our integrated theoretical-empirical study included a large-scale field experiment, replicated over 2 years with a total of 31 populations, that exposed bank voles to terrestrial and avian predators as well as naturally occurring weather conditions and food resources (31). We first artificially selected groups in the laboratory (lines) to create behaviorally dominant males with sisters of low fecundity, and vice versa (31). In a series of malemale competition trials, two males of opposing behavioral dominance competed with each other to mate with a wild female in estrus. The highdominance males overwhelmingly outcompeted the low-dominance males in mating success trials (c2 = 59.71, N = 168, P < 0.001) (Fig. 1A), and they had a significantly higher plasma testosterone level (generalized linear mixed model; line: F1,161 = 6.18, P = 0.014) (Fig. 1B). We then assigned males and females to large outdoor field enclosures by manipulating the reproductive quality (high or low behavioral dominance for males, high or
The direction of evolutionary change generally cannot be predicted without taking into account interactions between conspecifics, be they competitors or mates (1, 2). Additionally, the fitness effects of particular genotypes can often be highly sex-specific (3). Alleles beneficial to a son’s reproduction can be detrimental for a daughter’s success, or vice versa, resulting in different optimal trait values (optima) between the sexes (4–8). The presence of these sexually antagonistic (SA) alleles in a variety of organisms is now widely acknowledged (9–11), but less is known about how variation in such alleles is maintained. All else being equal, SA selection does not decrease genetic variation as rapidly as selection that favors the same alleles in both males and females (6, 12).
However, SA selection is not as beneficial for genetic diversity as true negative frequencydependent maintenance of alternative alleles, whereby rare genotypes are favored in reproduction (13). The process of variation depletion may end in intralocus sexual conflict that remains unresolved, such that the traits of males, females, or both do not match their optima [leading to a cost of SA alleles, the gender load (14)]. It may also end in resolved conflict if gene expression evolves to become more sex-specific (15). In the former case sexual antagonism is preserved, in the latter case it disappears, but vari-
1Centre of Excellence in Evolutionary Research, Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä, 40014 Jyväskylä, Finland. 2Centre of Excellence in Biological Interactions, Division of Evolution, Ecology and Genetics, Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. 3Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä, 40014 Jyväskylä, Finland. 4Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. 5Laboratoire d’Excellence “CORAIL,” USR 3278 CRIOBE, CNRS-EPHE, CBETM de l’Université de Perpignan, 66860 Perpignan Cedex, France.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: mikael.mokkonen@gmail.com
ation as such is lost in both. Because gender load can exist even if all individuals possess the same genotype—that is, the one that is the best compromise between male and female fitness— variation is not necessarily maintained by gender load per se. Sexual antagonism, however, becomes potentially powerful for variance maintenance once it combines with sex linkage (16), maternal effects (17), or assortative mating (18). Here, we focused on the role of frequency-dependent selection as an alternative for making sexual antagonism successful at maintaining genetic variation.
We tested whether frequency-dependent selection on dominance in males and/or females can maintain SA variation in field populations of a common European mammal, the bank vole (Myodes glareolus). The reproductive effort of bank voles is negatively frequency-dependent in the field (19), attesting to the direct influence of an individual’s neighbors on the population dynamics and life history evolution in this species. Previous experiments with this species have also
  972
18 NOVEMBER 2011 VOL 334 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Fig. 1. Experimental data for males artificially selected for high and low dominance. (A) Relative mating success in laboratory male-male competition for a female in estrus. (B) Mean plasma testosterone level. (C) Mean frequency dependence of reproductive success in the field. Post hoc testing showed that the number of offspring sired by rare dominant males was significantly greater than the number sired by common dominant males (z = 2.97, P = 0.015). No other pairwise groupings differed significantly from each other (P > 0.1). Mf (black bars), high-dominance males with low-fecundity sisters; mF (white bars), lowdominance males with high-fecundity sisters; R, rare; C, common. Error bars in (B) and (C) denote SEM.
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012

 ABC
111
0.9 0.8 0.7
-1
0.9
0.8 1 0.7
0.5 -1
-0.5 0 -0.5 0 -0.5 0
1 0.5
0 0.5 D(male)
-0.5
0 0.5 D(male)
1 -1
-0.5
0 0.5 D(male)
1 -1
-0.5
low fecundity for females) and frequency (rare or common) of male and female voles in these populations (fig. S1).
The reproductive success of males became negatively frequency-dependent in the field: Dominance was costly for males when it was the common tactic in the population (zero-inflated negative binomial count submodel; frequency, Z = –2.61, P = 0.009; line, Z = –1.01, P = 0.311; frequency × line, Z = 2.00, P = 0.046) (Fig. 1C). In contrast, the fitness of sisters demonstrated a sexually antagonistic effect without evidence for frequency dependence. The high-fecundity sisters of lowdominance males had significantly larger litter sizes than the sisters of high-dominance males (i.e., females selected for low fecundity) [5.32 T 0.24 versus 4.53 T 0.27 (SEM)], although, in a clear deviation from the male pattern, the reproductive output of these females did not depend on their frequency in the population (generalized linear model quasi-Poisson; frequency, t = 0.87, P = 0.389; line, t = 2.06, P = 0.043).
Combined with previous research on the selection of testosterone (20, 22, 25), our results suggest that there is potential for the sexes to experience antagonistic selection constraints in adaptation as a result of the physiological and behavioral components of their respective life history strategies. As shown in Fig. 1C, the male mating advantage is negatively frequency-dependent, which helps to explain why fixation of any allele is not predicted to occur.
In the next phase of our study, we extracted parameter estimates from our field data for use in our model (31), which expands previous work (27) to include diploid genetics and frequency dependence effects within males. Mating propensities of each male type either are constant or change with frequency; the latter choice creates implicit frequency dependence for the mating success of the other male type even if the mating propensity of this type was not set to depend on frequency, because an offspring sired by one male
cannot be sired by another (females being a limiting resource). This can lead to the maintenance of genetic variability even if explicit frequency dependence is present in only one male type.
We ran our model with explicit frequency dependence on one or both male types (in the former case, frequency dependence is implicit for subordinate males), as well as with no frequency dependence, using parameters extracted from the experimental results. As we do not know the exact genetic system controlling the antagonistic traits in the study system, we ran the model using the entire range of genetic dominance parameters from full recessiveness to full dominance. In the absence of frequency dependence, genetic variation was maintained only when genetic dominance for both female and male traits was high (in other words, A is the dominant allele for males; a is dominant for females) (Fig. 2A). Frequency dependence of the magnitude we found for voles makes the maintenance of genetic variation much easier; it is maintained for a large proportion of the parameter range describing genetic dominance (Fig. 2B). It is maintained to a very similar degree even if frequency dependence arises only implicitly for low-dominance males (Fig. 2C). Our proposed mechanism thus appears reasonably robust, and future work could fruitfully combine these findings with other mechanisms known to promote maintenance of variation under SA selection (16–18).
Our results also suggest that studies of this type should not be restricted to laboratory environments. Seminatural conditions led to a sharp difference in the success of rare versus common behaviorally dominant males (Fig. 1C)—an effect that would have remained undetectable had our study been confined to the mating trials conducted in the laboratory. The difference in optimal food and housing conditions in the lab and the limitations of the field environment can have implications for physiological and behavioral measures (32) and fitness consequences alike. Thus, our theoretical and empirical results
together show that selection favoring rare male morphs can maintain genetic variation in sexually antagonistic traits, while also indicating that ecological and social environments are important in defining the trait optima for males and females.
1 -1
D(female)
D(female)
Fig. 2. The outcome of the model, expressed as the frequency of the A allele after convergence for three different frequency dependence scenarios. Allele frequencies smaller than 1 indicate that variation is maintained. (A) No explicit frequency dependence. (B) Explicit negative frequency dependence of SA alleles in all male genotypes. (C) Explicit negative frequency dependence only in the behaviorally dominant AA males. AA, Aa, and aa males have relative mating success values of a1, a2, and a3, and maximum frequency dependence values of φ1, φ2, and φ3, respectively; AA, Aa, and aa females have fecundity values of b1, b2, and b3. Dmale and Dfemale represent
genetic dominance in males and females; g and t determine the shape of the frequency dependence curve [see (31) for details on the model and parameter estimates]. Parameter values used: a1 = 80, a3 = 20, b1 = 4.53, b3 =5.32,g=5,t=0.5,and(A)φ1 =φ2 =φ3 =0,(B)φ1 =0.569,φ3 = 0.262, (C) φ1 = 0.569, φ2 = φ3 = 0. The appropriate values for a2 and b2 [and φ2 for the scenario in (B)], corresponding to different dominance values Dmale and Dfemale, were calculated as a2 = [Dmale(a1 – a3) + a1 + a3]/2, b2 = [Dfemale(b3 – b1) + b3 + b1]/2, and φ2 = [Dmale(φ1 – φ3) + φ1 + φ3]/2 according to Falconer’s notation (33).
www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 334 18 NOVEMBER 2011
0.9
0.8
D(female)
1 0.7 0.5 -1
REPORTS
Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on June 8, 2012
