         ORIGINAL ARTICLE
MORE THAN BINDIN DIVERGENCE: REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION BETWEEN SYMPATRIC SUBSPECIES OF A SEA URCHIN BY ASYNCHRONOUS SPAWNING
Rachel M. Binks,1,2 Jane Prince,1 Jonathan P. Evans,1 and W. Jason Kennington1
1School of Animal Biology, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia
2E-mail: rachel.binks@grs.uwa.edu.au
Received May 14, 2011
Accepted April 15, 2012
Data Archived: doi:10.5061/dryad.1b549
The evolution of reproductive barriers is crucial to the process of speciation. In the Echinoidea, studies have focused on divergence in the gamete recognition protein, bindin, as the primary isolating mechanism among species. As such, the capacity of alternate mechanisms to be effective reproductive barriers and the phylogenetic context in which they arise is unclear. Here, we examine the evolutionary histories and factors limiting gene exchange between two subspecies of Heliocidaris erythrogramma that occur sympatrically in Western Australia. We found low, but significant differentiation between the subspecies in two mitochondrial genes. Further, coalescent analyses suggest that they diverged in isolation on the east and west coasts of Australia, with a subsequent range expansion of H. e. erythrogramma into Western Australia. Differentiation in bindin was minimal, indicating gamete incompatibility is an unlikely reproductive barrier. We did, however, detect strong asynchrony in spawning seasons; H. e. erythrogramma spawned over summer whereas H. e. armigera spawned in autumn. Taken together, we provide compelling evidence for a recent divergence of these subspecies and their reproductive isolation without gamete incompatibility. Western Australian H. erythrogramma may therefore present an intriguing case of incipient speciation, which depends on long-term persistence of the factors underlying this spawning asynchrony.
KEY WORDS: Heliocidariserythrogrammaarmigera,reproductiveisolation,speciation.
The process of speciation is initiated by barriers to gene exchange, which over time lead to the accumulation of genetic differences and reproductive isolation (Mayr 1942, 1963). Initial barriers to gene flow can arise by geographic displacement (i.e., allopatry), through biological, topographic, or oceanographic limitations to dispersal (e.g., Lessios et al. 2001; Johnson and Black 2006; Sherman et al. 2008), or in the same geographic location (i.e., sympatry) through ecological shifts and habitat specialization (e.g., Feder et al. 1988; Barluenga et al. 2006). Following extended periods of isolation and subsequent genetic differentiation, a variety of reproductive barriers can arise, which can be split into two categories: prezygotic barriers, which reduce
⃝C 2012 The Author(s). 1 Evolution
the opportunity or ability for gametes to successfully fertilize, and postzygotic barriers, which impact the fitness of hybrid offspring, either through impaired survival or sterility (Mayr 1963; Dobzhansky 1970). Studying these barriers in recently diverging groups can provide considerable insight into the evolutionary processes leading to speciation.
Marine species, particularly broadcast spawners, have been especially well studied in the context of understanding the evolution of prezygotic reproductive barriers owing to the ease of gamete access and manipulation (Palumbi 1994; Lessios 2007). In such species, reproductive isolation can arise in the form of temporal barriers by asynchronies in the timing of spawning
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01700.x
 
         RACHEL M. BINKS ET AL.
(e.g., Lessios 1984; Harriot 1985; Toro et al. 2002; Kruse et al. 2004; Levitan et al. 2004), whereas others may have spatial barriers to reproduction by aggregating in discrete habitats (e.g., Billet and Hausen 1982; Pernet 1999), or chemical barriers, including gamete attraction by species-specific chemo-attractants that direct sperm toward conspecific eggs (e.g., Miller 1979, 1997; Riffell et al. 2004). Finally, where gametes do interact directly, proteins expressed on the surface of gametes can exhibit speciesspecific structural differences that generate functional failures during heterospecific fertilization attempts (reviews in Swanson and Vacquier 2002; Zigler et al. 2005; Palumbi 2009).
The Echinoidea have recently gained considerable attention in marine speciation studies owing to the characterization of the gamete recognition protein, bindin. The extent of divergence in the bindin gene between species is directly correlated with gamete incompatibility (Zigler and Lessios 2003b; Zigler et al. 2005) and these proteins are therefore thought to play a major role in the reproductive isolation and ultimately speciation of echinoids. Divergence can arise rapidly by positive selection and as a result strong incompatibility can be found between both distantly (e.g., Strathman 1987) and closely related congeneric species (e.g., Palumbi and Metz 1991). Moreover, only genera consisting of sympatric species show bindin evolving under selection (Echinometra: Metz and Palumbi 1996; Strongylocentrotus: Biermann 1998; Heliocidaris: Zigler et al. 2003), whereas genera of allopatric species typically show neutral bindin evolution (Arbacia: Metz et al. 1998; Tripneustes: Zigler and Lessios 2003b; Lytechinus: Zigler and Lessios 2004). Although the resulting functional incompatibility is rarely 100% efficient or symmetric (e.g., Lessios and Cunningham 1990; Vacquier et al. 1995; Rahman et al. 2001; McClary and Sewell 2003; Rawson et al. 2003; Zigler et al. 2003), bindin divergence and gamete incompatibility is generally considered to be a major factor underlying speciation processes in echinoids.
As a result of the recent interest in bindin evolution, relatively little attention has been paid to alternate reproductive barriers among echinoid species. Asynchronous spawning is a well-known isolating mechanism among mass-spawning species, such as corals (e.g., Wilson and Harrison 2003; Levitan et al. 2004; Mangubhai and Harrison 2009), but has also been reported across a wide range of marine invertebrates (e.g., Toro et al. 2002; Kruse et al. 2004), fish (e.g., Danilowicz 1995), and algae (e.g., Pearson and Serra ̃o 2006). Such spawning events are typically triggered by species-specific environmental cues that may allow for reproductive isolation in heterogeneous environments. However, although lunar cycles have been shown to allow temporal gamete isolation among some Diadema species (Lessios 1984), the temperature and photoperiod cues that tend to trigger annual spawning cycles in echinoids are considered
too spatially or temporally variable for spawning asynchrony to be an effective reproductive barrier (see Lessios 2007 for a review).
The sea urchin Heliocidaris erythrogramma (VALENCIENNES 1846) is a well-known species for studies of developmental biology and evolution due to its unusual shift in reproductive strategy from the typical planktotrophic larvae to lecithotrophic larvae (e.g., Laegdsgaard et al. 1991; Raff et al. 1999; Wilson et al. 2005; Smith et al. 2009). As a consequence of this shift, H. erythrogramma larvae develop rapidly and have a relatively short planktonic phase, such that genetic subdivision occurs at much lower spatial scales in this species compared to its planktotrophic congener H. tuberculata (McMillan et al. 1992). In addition to this reproductive shift is strong bindin divergence and gamete incompatibility between these two species where they occur sympatrically in Eastern Australia (Zigler et al. 2003). More recently, questions have arisen as to whether similar reproductive barriers may be present within H. erythrogramma. Two subspecies, H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera, are broadly distributed between east and west coasts of Australia, respectively (Mortensen 1943), but recent work has revealed that they both occur within Western Australia, albeit with a strong dominance of H. e. armigera (Binks et al. 2011a). In this region of sympatry, these subspecies can be distinguished by spine morphology and coloration, where the thicker spined H. e. armigera consistently occurs with redviolet and red-violet-green coloration whereas the thinner spined H. e. erythrogramma typically exhibits white-green, red-green, and white-violet morphs (Binks et al. 2011a). Further examination with microsatellite markers revealed genetic differentiation four times greater between subspecies than within either subspecies. This trend remained consistent even across very fine spatial scales (<5km) despite the spatial potential for gene exchange (Binks et al. 2011b). With a lack of any obvious environmental barriers to gene flow, the question remains as to how this morphological and molecular differentiation is maintained across such fine spatial scales.
This study had two major objectives. First, we examine the phylogenetic relationships within and between these subspecies by sequencing CO1 and 16S for the Heliocidaris genus across the species’ Australian distribution. We then combine these data with microsatellite data for a coalescent IMa analysis to test alternate hypotheses for the biogeographic origins of these subspecies. Our second objective was to test for the presence of prezygotic reproductive barriers between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera within Western Australia. To address this, we assessed the likelihood of gamete incompatibility by sequencing the bindin gene and investigated the potential for asynchronous spawning by measuring spawning and gonadal activity for each subspecies in Western Australia over a two-year period.
 2 EVOLUTION 2012

                        Locations
across Australia. The colored lines indicate the Australian distributions of the species and subspecies collected and the colored symbols indicate collection sites for each respective group. Black represents H. e. armigera (circle), gray represents H. e. erythrogramma (circle), and white represents where both H. e. erythrogramma and H. tuberculata co-occur and were sampled from the same sites (diamond). Site abbreviations (and Australian state) in alphabetical order: AL = Altona (VIC); BM = Beaumaris (VIC); BP = Bass Point (NSW); HO = Hobart (TAS); JB = Jervoise Bay (WA); LB = Little Bay (NSW); MK = Mindarie Key (WA); PP = Point Peron (WA); RR = Radar Reef (WA); SF = South Fremantle (WA); ST = St Helens (TAS).
Methods and Materials
SAMPLE COLLECTIONS
Collections were taken from a range of locations around Australia for different aspects of the study (Fig. 1). In Western Australia, the two subspecies occur sympatrically, but often in uneven abundances; H. e. armigera tends to dominate most populations, with low frequencies of H. e. erythrogramma, although there are limited locations where H. e. erythrogramma is dominant (Binks et al. 2011a). Thus, to avoid statistical issues with small sample sizes and gain sufficient samples for assessing ongoing reproductive activities, subspecies had to be collected from separate locations where each occurred in reliable abundances. For mitochondrial and bindin gene sequencing, single collections were taken from the same four sites (H. e. erythrogramma: Mindarie Key and Point Peron, H. e. armigera: Radar Reef and South Fremantle) within Western Australia. In addition, mitochondrial analyses included H. e. erythrogramma collections from six Eastern Australian sites spanning New South Wales (Little Bay and Bass Point), Victoria (Altona and Beaumaris), and Tasmania (Hobart and St Helens). Heliocidaris tuberculata was also collected from each of the two New South Wales sites. To study spawning and gonadal activity, individuals of each subspecies were collected repeatedly from two
sites (H. e. erythrogramma: Mindarie Key, H. e. armigera: Jervoise Bay) within Western Australia. These two sites were chosen based on the ability to regularly access and collect individuals in sufficient numbers without affecting natural population sizes.
Western Australian collections consisted only of individuals that could be confidently assigned to subspecies and the most common color morph for each (H. e. armigera: red dermis, violet primary spines = RV; H. e. erythrogramma: white dermis, green primary spines = WG) (see Binks et al. 2011a). In turn, only RV and WG color morphs of Eastern Australian H. e. erythrogramma were collected to maintain consistency. All sea urchins were collected by snorkeling or reef-walking where appropriate.
MITOCHONDRIAL SEQUENCING AND ANALYSIS
Muscle tissue was dissected from a minimum of eight individuals per site and stored in 100% ethanol until required. Whole genomic DNA was extracted using the salting out procedure as described in Simmons et al. (2006). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification was performed in 25 μl reactions containing 1 × PCR Buffer, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 200 μM of each dNTP, 0.2 μM of primer, 1 U of Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Mulgrave, Victoria, Australia), and 2–3 μl of DNA template (approximately 20–30 ng). We designed CO1 primers using Oligo Primer Analysis Software version 8.0 (Rychlik 2007) to amplify approximately 675 bp for both H. erythrogramma subspecies and H. tuberculata: CO1HeF; GCA CAA CCT GGC TCC CTA CTA and CO1HeR; TCC TCG CTT TCC AGA GTA GTG, with an annealing temperature of 53◦C. For 16S, approximately 630 bp were amplified using primers described in Jeffery et al. (2003): 16SechF; CGC CTG TTT ACC AAA AAC AT and 16SechR; TCG TAG ATA GAA ACT GAC CTG, with a modified annealing temperature of 49◦C to remove nonspecific products. Amplifications were performed in an Eppendorf Mastercycler gradient thermal cycler. PCR conditions for both genes involved a preliminary 5-min denaturation stage at 94◦C, followed by 30 amplification cycles of 30 s denaturation at 94◦C, 30 s at the annealing temperature and 1-min extension at 72◦C. The final cycle included a 7-min extension at 72◦C. PCR products were purified with an AxyPrep PCR Cleanup Kit (Axygen Biosciences Inc., Union City, CA) and sequenced in both directions with an ABI 3730 96 capillary machine using BigDye Chemistry. Sequences were aligned and edited using Sequencher version 4.5 (Gene Codes Corp., Ann Arbor, MI). Haplotype sequences for all Heliocidaris subspecies and species have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers JF827309–JF827329 for CO1 and JF827330–JF827344 for 16S.
As an initial exploration of the mitochondrial differentiation expressed within H. erythrogramma, we generated haplotype networks for each of CO1 and 16S using tcs version 1.21 software by statistical parsimony (Clement et al. 2000). We then
F i g u r e
1 .
for the
complete
range
of sampling
sites
REPRODUCTIVE BARRIERS BETWEEN SEA URCHIN SUBSPECIES
 EVOLUTION 2012 3

         RACHEL M. BINKS ET AL.
generated a CO1 phylogeny for the Heliocidaris genus to infer the demographic history between the two subspecies; H. tuberculata was included for a known measure of species-level divergence. The appropriate model of nucleotide substitution was determined using ModelTest version 3.7 (Posada and Crandall 1998), which identified the Tamura and Nei (1993) model. We used PAUP∗ version 4.0b10 (Swofford 2003) to generate a phylogeny for all haplotypes of CO1 by neighbor-joining methods with gamma correction and 9999 iterations for bootstrap support. To form an outgroup, we included two randomly chosen CO1 Echinometra mathaei sequences (Palumbi et al. 1997) using data available on GenBank (accession numbers AF018882, AF018884). We calculated Kimura two-parameter sequence divergences (Kimura 1980) between clades found in the CO1 phylogeny and with a particular focus on H. erythrogramma, and assessed these divergences with hierarchical analyses of molecular variance (AMOVA) using Arlequin version 3.11 (Excoffier et al. 2005). To first assess geographic structure without the confounding effects of subspecies, we partitioned the geographic variance in CO1 for H. e. erythrogramma into: (1) east versus west coastlines; (2) sites within coastlines; and (3) within sites. In turn, to determine the significance of divergence between subspecies without the confounding effects of geographic distance, we then used the Western Australian dataset to partition the variation (1) between subspecies, (2) between sites within subspecies, and (3) within sites.
Finally, we implemented isolation with migration (IM) coalescent analyses using IMa software (Hey and Nielsen 2007). This IM model assumes a panmictic ancestral population of effective size, θA , which at time t in the past, split into two daughter populations of sizes θ1 and θ2 that have since undergone regular rates of gene flow, m1 and m2 in each direction. IMa estimates posterior probabilities for each of these demographic parameters between any two populations using Monte Carlo Markov Chain methods. We were particularly interested in estimating the time since divergence within and between subspecies to quantitatively examine possible scenarios to explain how the two subspecies came to occur sympatrically in Western Australia. Given the twopopulation limits of IMa, we performed two separate analyses: (1) between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera within Western Australia (hereafter denoted with the subscript A for all parameters), and (2) within H. e. erythrogramma between east and west coastlines (denoted by the subscript B). These analyses enabled the testing of three hypotheses: (1) geographic isolation between coastlines generated alternate subspecies with a subsequent range expansion of H. e. erythrogramma into Western Australia (i.e., broad vicariance: tA > tB); (2) geographic barriers formed within Western Australia to isolate and differentiate subspecies in allopatry within Western Australia (i.e., local vicariance: tA < tB); or (3) ecological barriers formed within Western Australia to
isolate and differentiate each subspecies in sympatry (also tA < tB). Further assessment of consistency in the levels of divergence across loci could then be used to differentiate between the latter two hypotheses (i.e., concordant patterns across all loci with local vicariance due to random drift acting equally across the genome, or discordant patterns in a subset of loci acting in sympatry). We were also interested in estimations of m1 and m2 to determine the extent and direction of gene flow between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera since their divergence.
To strengthen these two analyses, we combined the mitochondrial data from this study with microsatellite data; all Western Australian microsatellite data were acquired from a previous study (Binks et al. 2011b) whereas Eastern Australian data were obtained by amplifying individuals collected in the current study with the methods described in Binks et al. (2011b). Thus, both analyses were run with a total of five loci; CO1 and 16S (nA = 32, nB = 44 for each locus) were run under the Hasegawa-KishinoYano (HKY) mutational model and all three microsatellite loci (C101, C115, and D105) were run under the stepwise mutational model using a subsample of randomly selected individuals (nA = 378, nB = 268 for each locus). For each analysis, several preliminary runs were performed with wide prior parameter distributions to optimize the final run which consisted of 150 chains for a total of 10 million steps (sampling every 100), following a burnin period of 1,000,000 steps. We included a geometric heating scheme to increase mixing (g1 = 0.9, g2 = 0.8). During preliminary trials, the posterior distributions for t contained flat tails that did not reach zero. To set a logical upper bound for this prior, we followed the methods of Peters et al. (2007); we assumed that the time since divergence could not be older than the time of the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA). We then averaged the posterior distribution of TMRCA across loci and used the upper 95% highest posterior density (HPD) of TMRCA as the upper bound for t. For each analysis, three identical runs with different random seed numbers were performed to ensure consistency, evolutionarily stable strategy values were all above 1000 and parameter plots showed no trends, which together, indicated convergence had been reached. To convert the IMa parameter estimates to biologically meaningful demographic values, we followed the methods described and implemented in Won and Hey (2005). In doing so, we applied a mutation rate of 3.5% per million years for CO1 evolution in sea urchins (Zigler et al. 2003) and a generation turnover of two years.
BINDIN SEQUENCING AND ANALYSIS
Pure genomic DNA, extracted as detailed above, was utilized from 10 individuals of each subspecies (i.e., five from each Western Australian site). Approximately 1537 bp of the mature gene and its intron were amplified using primers HeF1 and HeR1 and sequenced using primers HeF1, HeR1, Heout5, Heout51,
 4 EVOLUTION 2012

         and MB1130+ (Zigler et al. 2003). PCR conditions involved a preliminary 3-min denaturation stage at 95◦C, followed by 35 amplification cycles of 45 s denaturation at 94◦C, 45 s at the annealing temperature (56◦ C) and 150 s extension at 72◦ C with a final extension cycle for 10 min at 72◦C. All individuals were sequenced twice to ensure data quality against sequencing errors. Once the intron was excluded, no more than one heterozygous site was detected throughout the mature gene within a single individual and therefore cloning was not necessary to obtain haplotype data. Sequences were aligned and edited using Sequencher version 4.5 (Gene Codes Corp.). Haplotype sequences for H. e. armigera have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers JQ364936–38.
Following Zigler et al. (2003), we divided the bindin gene into three regions: 31 amino acids of the hotspot of rapid evolution (Metz and Palumbi 1996; Biermann 1998); 55 amino acids of the highly conserved core region (Vacquier et al. 1995; Zigler and Lessios 2003a); and 117 amino acids that flank either side of these two regions making up the rest of the gene. However, the low levels of variation detected among the Western Australian sequences across all regions negated the typical application of statistical analyses to compare the ratio of synonymous to nonsynonymous substitutions or tests for selection within or between subspecies. Patterns of bindin divergence between these subspecies were therefore described qualitatively for each region. We added all Western Australian haplotypes to the Eastern Australian Heliocidaris bindin phylogeny generated by Zigler et al. (2003) to determine where these Western Australian subspecies fit in the Heliocidaris genus, particularly for comparison with our CO1 phylogeny. We used PAUP∗ version 4.0b10 (Swofford 2003) to regenerate the phylogeny using the substitution model of Tamura and Nei (1993) with gamma correction and 9999 iterations for bootstrap support by neighbor joining methods. In doing so, we included bindin haplotypes from Eastern Australian H. e. erythrogramma (accession numbers AF529574–80; AF530401–13) and H. tuberculata (accession numbers AF529581–84; AF530414– 43) (Zigler et al. 2003), as well as two E. mathaei haplotypes (Metz and Palumbi 1996; accession numbers U39511–12) as an outgroup, all available on GenBank.
SPAWNING SEASONALITY
Between 2008 and 2010, regular collections of approximately 15 individuals of each subspecies were taken from each respective site, starting in October each year and continuing fortnightly until all spawning activity had ceased (June). October was chosen as an early starting point because eastern populations of H. e. erythrogramma are known to spawn annually between the summer months of December and February (Williams and Anderson 1975; Dix 1977; Laegdsgaard et al. 1991). Only individuals greater than 50 mm in test diameter were collected to ensure sexual maturity
(Dix 1977) and the size range was kept to a minimum to avoid any influence of body size on gonadal measures (Gonor 1972).
Each individual was weighed to the nearest 0.001 g and then we induced spawning with a 3 mL injection of 0.5 M KCl through the peristomial membrane. For both subspecies, the proportion of each sex spawning at a given sampling time was assessed within a 30-min period following the injection. Only individuals that spawned copiously (>0.2 mL) were considered successful, that is, those most likely to be ready to spawn naturally. Individuals with limited response were classified as not spawning given that they may be in early stages of the gametogenic cycle or have already spawned (Lessios 1984). Following spawning trials, each individual was dissected for a quantitative measure of reproductive activity. The gonadal somatic index (GSI) was calculated as the total gonadal wet weight (g) divided by the total body wet weight (g), multiplied by 100 (%). Previously spawned gametes were collected dry and recombined with gonadal tissue to be included in the gonadal wet weight measure. Gonadal indices were calculated during the second spawning season only (October 2009 to June 2010).
We tested each bimonthly sample for deviations from a 1:1 sex ratio using χ2 tests and then calculated the overall significance for each subspecies by summing the independent χ2 values and associated degrees of freedom. Proportion data for both spawning responses and gonadal indices were arcsine transformed (Zar 1984) and used in two-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) using JMP® version 8.0.1. We tested for variation in spawning response between sexes (fixed) and years (fixed) for each subspecies, and found no significant difference in the proportion of males and females spawning responses (HEA: F1,40 = 0.15, P = 0.70 and HEE: F1,28 = 4.23, P = 0.05), or spawning between years (HEA: F1,40 = 0.33, P = 0.57 and HEE: F1,28 = 3.47, P = 0.07). We also tested for variation in gonadal indices between sexes (fixed) and bimonthly sample (fixed) for each subspecies and found significant differences between sampling times (HEA: F17,170 = 6.16, P < 0.0001 and HEE: F16,187 = 15.25, P < 0.0001), but no difference between sexes (HEA: F1,170 = 0.41, P = 0.53 and HEE: F1,187 = 0.36, P = 0.55) or their interaction (HEA: F17,170 = 0.22, P = 0.99 and HEE: F16,187 = 0.23, P = 0.99). This suggests that the changes in GSI over time were synchronous between the sexes. Data for both spawning receptivity and gonadal indices, therefore, were pooled across the sexes and data for spawning were also pooled across years. These pooled data were then used in two separate ANOVAs to test for differences in both spawning receptivity and gonadal indices between bimonthly samples (fixed) and subspecies (fixed).
Sea surface temperature (SST) and photoperiod data for all sites over the study period were obtained for comparison with spawning and GSI data. Monthly averages of SST data were provided by GIovanni Ocean Color Radiometry: Online Visualization
REPRODUCTIVE BARRIERS BETWEEN SEA URCHIN SUBSPECIES
 EVOLUTION 2012 5

         RACHEL M. BINKS ET AL.
Table 1. Analysis of molecular variance partitioning the genetic variation in CO1: (A) across different spatial scales within H. e. erythrogramma only; and (B) within and between subspecies of H. erythrogramma within Western Australia provides degrees of freedom (df), sum of squares (SS), and the percentage (%) of variation for each source.
  Source
(A) Geographic structure
Between coasts
Among sites within coasts Within sites
(B) Subspecies structure
Between subspecies
Among sites within subspecies Within sites
NS = not significant.
∗P < 0.001; ∗∗P < 0.0001.
df SS
1 111.69
6 27.41 80 70.56
1 30.19
2 0.00 27 0.00
% Variation
75.24∗∗ 7.01∗ 17.74∗∗
100.00∗∗ 0.00NS 0.00NS
      Figure 2. Haplotype networks for (A) CO1 and (B) 16S mitochondrial genes, estimated by statistical parsimony using tcs software. Each oval represents a different haplotype; its relative size is proportional to its frequency. The shaded coloration reflects the subspecific and geographic status of each haplotype; either H. e. erythrogramma or H. e. armigera and whether the subspecies was sampled in Eastern Australia (E) or Western Australia (W). The open circles denote the number of mutational steps between adjacent haplotypes.
and Analysis (http://gdata1.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/daac-bin/G3/gui. cgi?instance_id=ocean_month) and data for photoperiod were obtained from Geoscience Australia (http://www.ga.gov.au/ bin/astro/sunrisenset). There was very little spatial or temporal variation in either SST or photoperiod, so data were averaged across sites and years for each parameter.
Results
MITOCHONDRIAL DIVERGENCE AND PHYLOGENY
Haplotype networks of H. erythrogramma for each of CO1 and 16S are shown in Fig. 2A and B. A total of 14 haplotypes were found for CO1, of which five were singletons. Two of these haplotypes were found within Western Australia and the remaining 12 in Eastern Australia, with no shared haplotypes between east and west coasts. Within Western Australia, the two haplotypes were differentiated by four substitutions and each haplotype was consistently associated with either the RV H. e. armigera or the WG H. e. erythrogramma. In contrast, there was no haplotype differentiation between RV and WG H. e. erythrogramma in Eastern Australia, and while each state tended to be dominated by one or two haplotypes, there were three haplotypes shared across the entire eastern coastline. As expected in a more conserved gene, less variation was observed for 16S, but the results support those from
CO1. A total of nine haplotypes were found, five of which were singletons. Most of the variation was found in Western Australia (five haplotypes). Again, each was unique to the west coast and no haplotypes were shared between H. e. armigera and H. e. erythrogramma. There was very little variation across Eastern Australian samples, with almost all NSW and Victorian samples sharing a single haplotype and almost all Tasmanian samples having another. Again, there was no differentiation of haplotypes between color morphs of H. e. erythrogramma in these eastern sites.
These haplotype patterns were supported by the CO1 phylogeny for the Heliocidaris genus (Fig. 3A). Heliocidaris tuberculata is clearly shown to be a distinct species in a separate clade with approximately 14% sequence divergence from H. erythrogramma. Within H. erythrogramma, the Eastern and Western Australian samples are separated into distinct subclades, with 1.5% divergence between eastern and western H. e. erythrogramma. Despite low levels of sequence divergence within Western Australia, the two subspecies shared no haplotypes and their sequence divergence of 0.7% is low, but highly consistent among individuals. In contrast, the Eastern Australian H. e. erythrogramma showed no phylogenetic structure with regard to color morphs. AMOVA showed significant effects of both geographical distance and subspecies on variability of CO1 divergence (Table 1). Of the total genetic divergence within H. e. erythrogramma (1.5%), approximately 75% occurred between the east and west coasts of its Australian distribution, with only 7% variation among sites within each coastline and 18% within sites. Within Western Australia, all of the genetic variation was attributed to differences between the two subspecies, with no variation among sites within each subspecies or within sites.
The demographic parameters estimated with the IMa analyses provide further insight on the origins of H. erythrogramma.
 6 EVOLUTION 2012

         REPRODUCTIVE BARRIERS BETWEEN SEA URCHIN SUBSPECIES
  AB
                                          Figure 3. Phylogeny of the (A) CO1 and (B) bindin genes for the Heliocidaris genus, as determined by neighbor-joining methods. The tree has been rooted using two Echinometra mathaei sequences (not shown). Only distinct haplotypes are shown and labels correspond to the species or subspecies (HT = H. tuberculata; HEE = H. e. erythrogramma; HEA = H. e. armigera), and whether they were collected from the east (E) or west (W) coasts of Australia. Haplotypes for each subspecies collected in Western Australia are highlighted in gray for ease of interpretation. All branches with bootstrap support of >90% are indicated by an asterisk (∗).
Within Western Australia, the effective population size for H. e. erythrogramma was estimated to be considerably smaller (13,000; 90% HPD interval: 6000–26,000) than that for H. e. armigera (49,000; 27,000–92,000). The ancestral population size of the two subspecies was estimated to be 111,000 (1200–250,000) and the timing of their divergence at approximately 65,000 (46,000– 250,000) years ago. The migration parameters indicated an asymmetric pattern of gene flow since this split, with low levels of ongoing gene flow (0.31; 0.02–2.94 migrant gene copies per year) from H. e. erythrogramma to H. e. armigera but negligible gene flow in the opposite direction (0.0002; 0.00–0.001 migrant gene copies per year). In comparison, the analysis within H. e. erythrogramma between east and west coastlines revealed fairly even effective population sizes of 20,000 (11,000–38,000) and 24,000 (11,000–42,000), with an ancestral population size of 164,000 (32,000–630,000). These two groups were estimated to have split approximately 24,000 (10,000–190,000) years ago with ongoing gene flow from Eastern Australia to Western Australia (0.76; 0.08–3.54 migrant gene copies per year) but minimal gene flow from west to east (0.06; 0.00–1.99 migrant gene copies per year).
BINDIN DIVERGENCE AND PHYLOGENY
From 20 individuals spanning four populations, we detected minimal bindin divergence within or between the two Western Australian subspecies. Throughout the mature gene, no variation was found within the conserved core region, one polymorphic
site was detected in the hotspot and three polymorphic sites in the remainder of the gene. All of these sites represented replacement substitutions, two of which were consistently differentiated between subspecies (outside of the hotspot) and two singletons. This generated a total of four haplotypes, three for H. e. armigera and a single haplotype for all H. e. erythrogramma individuals. Although the H. e. armigera haplotypes were novel, the Western Australian H. e. erythrogramma haplotype was also present in Eastern Australia (GenBank accession number AF530401) and the two replacement substitutions found in H. e. armigera are common in eastern H. e. erythrogramma. Consequently, unlike the east-west subclades formed within the CO1 gene phylogeny, these two Western Australian bindin haplotypes simply integrated within the range of Eastern Australian haplotypes with no significant subspecific or geographic structure in bindin across the species’ entire Australian distribution (Fig. 3B).
SPAWNING SEASONALITY
Sex ratios within bimonthly samples did not differ significantly from 1:1 for H. e. armigera (overall χ2 = 29.4, df = 36, P > 0.1) or H. e. erythrogramma (overall χ2 = 26.2, df = 36, P > 0.1). Table 2 shows that there was no significant difference in the total proportions of individuals spawning between the subspecies, but we did detect a significant difference in spawning responses between bimonthly samples. We also detected a significant sampling period-by-subspecies interaction
 EVOLUTION 2012 7

         RACHEL M. BINKS ET AL.
  A
                     B
                     C
                          Figure 4. Changes in (A) spawning receptivity and (B) gonadal indices for each subspecies of H. erythrogramma in Western Australia between 2008 and 2010. Data have been pooled and averaged across sexes and years where applicable. Also provides averaged monthly data for (C) sea surface temperatures and photoperiod, also pooled across sites and years.
for spawning response, which indicates that each subspecies spawned differentially across sampling times. Heliocidaris e. erythrogramma spawned between November and February each year, whereas H. e. armigera spawned between December and June, but only spawned consistently from late February/March each year (Fig. 4A).
Data for gonadal indices supported the pattern of asynchronous spawning seasons between subspecies. The gonadal somatic index (GSI) was significantly different between bimonthly
sampling times and between subspecies. There was also a significant sampling time-by-subspecies interaction indicating that GSI differed between subspecies at different sampling times (Table 2). GSI values for H. e. erythrogramma peaked between October and January and decreased thereafter, showing slight overlap with GSI values for H. e. Armigera, which were initially low in October and increased with time to peak between January and April (Fig. 4B). These patterns coincide with spawning data to reveal a typical prespawning peak in GSI with a subsequent decline in
 8 EVOLUTION 2012

         Ta b l e 2 . Analyses of variance (ANOVA) for (A) spawning and (B) gonadal indices between sampling periods and subspecies. Data for each analysis were pooled across years and sexes where applicable provides degrees of freedom (df), sum of squares (SS), and F-statistic for each source.
ance and a subsequent range expansion of H. e. erythrogramma into Western Australia. The overlapping 90% HPD intervals of these estimates might be narrowed down with more data but is most likely an artifact of such recent divergence coupled with the low levels of divergence between these subspecies. Nevertheless, these results effectively rule out the possibility that the two subspecies split within Western Australia, either by local vicariance or in sympatry. Moreover, the low effective population size of H. e. erythrogramma in Western Australia reflects the low abundance and patchy distribution described previously for this subspecies (Binks et al. 2011a); such low relative abundance, combined with lower genetic diversity (Binks et al. 2011b) and the asymmetric migration estimates from H. e. erythrogramma to H. e. armigera, is consistent with such a range expansion of H. e. erythrogramma into Western Australia.
Following the demographic history of a recent divergence, the phylogenetic analyses showed low but highly consistent levels of mitochondrial divergence between the two subspecies within Western Australia. And given that we found no equivalent haplotype distinction between RV and WG morphs of H. e. erythrogramma in the Eastern Australian dataset, we can be confident that this low, but consistent divergence is due to subspecies differentiation rather than an artifact of color variation within Western Australia. It would be useful, however, to obtain data for populations along southern Australia, between the east and west coasts; such data could provide more insight into how these two lineages are distributed. Particularly given that IMa analyses detected low levels of ongoing gene flow from eastern populations into Western Australia, but not vice versa, it would be interesting to explore the possible oceanographic factors mediating such an asymmetric exchange across southern Australia. Moreover, the current study incorporated only individuals that could be confidently assigned to subspecies; it would also be of value to assess individuals of intermediate morphology to determine whether they represent intermediate haplotypes between the two subspecies. Nevertheless, the phylogenetic and coalescent analyses in this study support the assertion that these subspecies are not freely interbreeding, as previously suggested by morphological (Binks et al. 2011a) and microsatellite (Binks et al. 2011b) differentiation, despite their sympatric distribution in Western Australia.
The limited, asymmetric patterns of gene flow found between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera cannot be explained by gamete incompatibility. Bindin divergence was minimal, with only two polymorphic sites between subspecies, both of which occurred outside of the hotspot region. Although the buildup of nonsynonymous substitutions is highly correlated with gamete incompatibility in echinoids, a review by Zigler et al. (2005) suggested that such substitutions only result in effective incompatibility when they make up more than 1% of the mature gene. This typically means that at least 4–10 amino acid changes are
Source
(A) Spawning (2008–2010)
Sampling period
Subspecies
Sampling period × subspecies Residual
(B) Gonadal index (2009–2010) Sampling period
Subspecies
Sampling period × subspecies Residual
NS = not significant. ∗P < 0.001.
df
15 1 15 90
16 1 16 380
SSF
1.46 3.40∗
0.02 0.70NS 6.85 15.98∗ 2.57
0.24 5.56∗ 0.12 45.50∗ 0.73 16.63∗ 1.04
REPRODUCTIVE BARRIERS BETWEEN SEA URCHIN SUBSPECIES
        GSI during the spawning period for each subspecies (Fig. 4A and B).
Fluctuations in photoperiod and sea surface temperature were closely associated with each other, but with a slight lag in SST (Fig. 4C). The longest photoperiod was in December each year, whereas the highest sea surface temperatures occurred in January and February. This was followed by the shortest photoperiod in June, with a corresponding minimum in sea surface temperatures from July through to September. The onset of consistent spawning occurred at a lower temperature for H. e. erythrogramma (19.9 ± 0.23◦ C) than for H. e. armigera (22.11 ± 0.09◦ C) and each, respectively, occurred before and after the peak SST of 23.15 ± 0.22◦C over January and February (Fig. 4A–C).
Discussion
The Echinoidea is a model group for marine speciation studies, with particular focus on the evolution of gamete recognition proteins as the primary mechanism for prezygotic reproductive isolation (reviews in Swanson and Vacquier 2002; Zigler et al. 2005; Palumbi 2009). Here, we highlight asynchronous spawning as an alternate mechanism for reproductive isolation in echinoids, as demonstrated between two divergent subspecies of the Australian sea urchin H. erythrogramma, and infer the biogeographic scenario underlying this novel means of divergence.
The demographic parameters estimated with the IMa analyses help to resolve the biogeographic origins of these two subspecies. Estimates of the time since divergence showed that Western Australian H. e. erythrogramma split from H. e. armigera before splitting from Eastern Australian H. e. erythrogramma (i.e., tA > tB), thus supporting the hypothesis of broad vicari-
 EVOLUTION 2012 9

         RACHEL M. BINKS ET AL.
required for partial gamete incompatibility, and a minimum of 8–10 changes for complete isolation (Zigler et al. 2005); such levels of substitution were not found within this study. Moreover, irrespective of subspecies, the bindin phylogeny showed no differentiation between Western Australian and Eastern Australian alleles, which is consistent with unpublished data cited by Lessios (2007). Finally, a lack of gamete incompatibility between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera is also supported by fertilization trials which demonstrated high fertilization success in both intraand intersubspecific crosses (Binks 2012). Taken together, these results strongly argue against gamete incompatibility as a factor explaining the limited gene flow between these subspecies within Western Australia.
Although we found no evidence for gamete incompatibility, we did detect significant asynchrony in the spawning seasons of each subspecies within Western Australia. Although H. e. erythrogramma spawned within the same summer spawning season found in eastern H. e. erythrogramma (December—early February), spawning was later in H. e. armigera (late February— June) each year. Even with slight overlap, this reveals that H. e. armigera gametes are only becoming mature when H. e. erythrogramma is coming to the end of its spawning season. This accounts for the asymmetric nature of gene flow between these subspecies found by the IMa analysis; some gene flow from H. e. armigera to H. e. erythrogramma is possible via the low numbers of H. e. armigera spawning earlier, during the peak H. e. erythrogramma season. In contrast, no H. e. erythrogramma were found to spawn later during the H. e. armigera autumn season, hence the lack of gene flow in this direction. The proportion of earlyspawning H. e. armigera was also confirmed to be low during the above-mentioned fertilization trials. These trials were performed in late January in an attempt to access viable gametes from both subspecies simultaneously. However, it was not possible to reliably induce spawning in H. e. armigera at this time and gametes had to be dissected manually for use in the trials. Although fertilization was successful, over 90% of crosses involving this subspecies failed to develop successfully into a free-swimming larval stage (see Binks 2012 for more detail). Both the inability to induce spawning and the developmental failure are most likely attributed to inviability of the H. e. armigera gametes so early in the year. And given that the effects of planktonic dilution are so strong, even a narrow temporal delay should effectively reduce heterospecific gamete interaction (Pennington 1985). Thus, this asynchrony spanning weeks and potentially up to months should be more than sufficient to limit the majority of gamete interactions between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera.
How such a shift in spawning season may have arisen is unclear, particularly because the environmental triggers and underlying genetics of gametogenesis and spawning in H. erythrogramma are poorly understood. However, it follows that the broad
vicariance of the two subspecies on opposite coastlines, which experience differing oceanographic conditions, may have led to different spawning seasons, and in turn, subsequent expansion of H. e. erythrogramma into Western Australia explains the asynchrony that we found. Temperature is thought to be important for eastern H. e. erythrogramma, where spawning commences when temperatures reach approximately 19◦C and cease before the summer peak of 23◦C (Laegdsgaard 1989). This is consistent with the pattern found in this study for Western Australian H. e. erythrogramma. Alternatively, the autumn shift of spawning in H. e. armigera is similar to Rottnest Island populations of E. mathaei, which exhibit a prolonged spawning season through the winter months relative to other regions of the species’ distribution (Pearse and Phillips 1968). This is attributed to warmer winter waters of the Leeuwin Current (Cresswell and Golding 1980; Legeckis and Cresswell 1981), enabling reproductive processes to persist. Thus, in a similar manner, this extended period of warmer waters during the later part of the year may allow spawning and embryo development to persist in H. e. armigera during a time period that would not be possible in the colder waters on the east coast. Moreover, the Leeuwin Current is thought to have been present and more intense in the late Pleistocene (Li et al. 1999; McGowran et al. 1997), during which time the two subspecies are estimated to have split. Other factors, such as egg predation or settlement conditions may also be crucial determinants to the timing of spawning that may differ between east and Western Australia. Whether this shifted spawning season was driven directly by selective pressures from such environmental factors, or simply as a consequence of prolonged local isolation between coastlines, is unclear. However, the small proportion of H. e. armigera shown to spawn synchronously with H. e. erythrogramma suggests that the processes mediating the shift in spawning season may not be complete, or that there may be other cues to spawning in addition to temperature.
We acknowledge that further work needs to be done to identify the consistency of this asynchrony across the entire sympatric range of the two subspecies in Western Australia.
There is likely to be some temporal or spatial variability in spawning for each subspecies and future work should perform a more intensive assessment of spawning or investigate patterns of recruitment, where recruits from each subspecies should appear at different times of the year. However, given that the spawning of H. e. erythrogramma matches that of its eastern counterparts and the autumn spawning of H. e. armigera has been documented in other studies from alternate locations and years (Stuart-Andrews 2005; Evans et al. 2007; Fitzpatrick et al. 2010), we believe this asynchrony to be widespread through Western Australia. It is unfortunate that the disproportionate abundances of each subspecies precluded us from incorporating fully sympatric populations in this study; in fact this slightly segregated distribution may also
 10 EVOLUTION 2012

         indicate some spatial barrier to reproduction. However, the microsatellite differentiation between these subspecies is upheld, even within sympatric populations (Binks et al. 2011a) and so spatial isolation alone cannot explain the limitations of gene flow between H. e. erythrogramma and H. e. armigera. Thus, in the absence of gamete incompatibility, spawning asynchrony appears to form the major prezygotic barrier to gene exchange where these two subspecies co-occur within Western Australia.
Conclusion
In summary, this study reports the biogeographic history of two subspecies of H. erythrogramma and identifies asynchronous spawning as an isolating mechanism between them where they occur sympatrically within Western Australia. Evidence of ongoing gene flow between these taxa, albeit limited, suggests that they should not yet be regarded as distinct species. Nevertheless, this study suggests that asynchronous spawning can represent an effective reproductive barrier to gene exchange in echinoid species without the need for divergence in gamete recognition proteins. Should the factors responsible for driving this spawning asynchrony remain stable over time, the prolonged isolation between H. e. armigera and H. e. erythrogramma will continue to drive further divergence. These two subspecies may therefore represent an intriguing case of incipient speciation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank D. Ayre, C. Sanderson, S. New, S. Vij, and A. Silla for help with Eastern Australian collections. Also much thanks to S. Lukehurst and Y. Hitchen for helpful advice with molecular methods and to K. Zigler for guidance with bindin data analysis. We are also grateful to M. Hart and three anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on the manuscript. This research was funded by the School of Animal Biology through the University of Western Australia and the Holsworth Wildlife Research Endowment.
LITERATURE CITED
 12 EVOLUTION 2012

Associate Editor: M. Hart
REPRODUCTIVE BARRIERS BETWEEN SEA URCHIN SUBSPECIES
 EVOLUTION 2012 13
