ORIGINAL ARTICLE 
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2011.01516.x 
PREZYGOTIC ISOLATION BETWEEN 
SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAE AND 
SACCHAROMYCES PARADOXUS THROUGH 
DIFFERENCES IN MATING SPEED AND 
GERMINATION TIMING 
Helen A. Murphy1,2 and Clifford W. Zeyl3 
1Department of Biology, The College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia 23187–8795 
2E-mail: hamurphy@wm.edu 
3Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27109 
Received September 10, 2009 
Accepted November 4, 2011 
Data Archived: Dryad doi:10.5061/dryad.708bb5kr 
Although prezygotic isolation between sympatric populations of closely related animal and plant species is well documented, 
far less is known about such evolutionary phenomena in sexual microbial species, as most are difficult to culture and manipulate. 
Using the molecular and genetic tools available for the unicellular fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and applying them to 
S. paradoxus, we tested the behavior of individual cells from sympatric woodland populations of both species for evidence of 
prezygotic isolation. First, we confirmed previous observations that vegetative cells of both species mate preferentially with 
S. cerevisiae. Next, we found evidence for mate discrimination in spores, the stage in which outcrossing opportunities are 
most likely to occur. There were significant differences in germination timing between the species: under the same conditions, 
S. paradoxus spores do not begin germinating until almost all S. cerevisiae spores have finished. When germination time was 
staggered, neither species discriminated against the other, suggesting that germination timing is responsible for the observed 
mate discrimination. Our results indicate that the mechanisms of allochronic isolation that are well known in plants and animals 
can also operate in sexual microbes. 
KEY WORDS: Allochronic isolation, mating speed, reproductive isolation, spore germination, wild yeast. 
Reproductive isolation can prevent gene flow between sympatric 
species,maintaining their genetic isolation (Coyne and Orr 2004). 
Where hybrids between sympatric species have low fitness or fertility, 
prezygotic isolation can prevent mistakes in mate choice 
and the associated fitness cost of wasted reproductive effort. It 
can also play a role in the process of speciation. Prezygotic isolating 
mechanisms can take many forms, including differences 
in signals that allow individuals to recognize appropriate mates. 
Examples include mating calls in crickets (Mendelson and Shaw 
2002), song and plumage color in birds (Saetre et al. 1997;Uyet al. 
2008), body color in fish (Seehausen and van Alphen 1998), and 
pheromones in moths (McElfresh and Millar 2001). Other mechanisms 
may take the form of allochronic isolation: differences 
in the timing of life-history traits that lead to isolation between 
populations or species. Examples include flowering time (Ellis 
et al. 2006), spawning synchronization in algae (Clifton 1997) and 
corals (Knowlton et al. 1997), diel activity in moths (Devries et al. 
2008), and migration and breeding in salmon (Quinn et al. 2000). 
Although such reproductive isolating mechanisms have received 
attention in animals and plants, far less is known about 
1196 
C  
2011 The Author(s). Evolution C  
2011 The Society for the Study of Evolution. 
Evolution 66-4: 1196–1209

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
prezygotic isolation in fungi (Kohn 2005). The diversity of fungal 
life cycles, which can uncouplemeiosis from syngamy and cell fusion 
from karyogamy, may hold interesting mechanisms of prezygotic 
isolation not found in other organisms. In a meta-analysis of 
the few studies that have been done, Homobasidiomycota tended 
to exhibit enhanced premating isolation in sympatry, whereas Ascomycota 
did not (Le Gac and Giraud 2008). Many of the species 
included in the analysis were parasitic, and their distinctive demographics 
and population structures make comparisons to other 
multicellular organisms difficult. 
Unicellular sexual eukaryotes, many of which are fungal, are 
a particularly interesting group that has received almost no attention. 
For many plants and animals, sex is a necessary risk of 
reproduction, and numerous gametes may reduce the fitness cost 
of a mistake in mate choice. In multicellular fungi, an individual 
can mate with multiple partners, including itself, and without 
necessarily fusing nuclei, again reducing the cost of choosing 
a postzygotically incompatible partner. For example, genetically 
diverged, sympatric isolates of Neurospora exhibited a pattern of 
prezygotic reproductive isolation (Dettman et al. 2003). By contrast, 
for a single cell, mating not only interrupts mitotic reproduction, 
but nuclear fusion risks permanently trapping its lineage 
in a sterile hybrid. This may have little population-level effect but 
would be expected to impose strong selection on individual cells 
to avoid such a fate. Prezygotic isolation has been evolved in laboratory 
populations of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a unicellular, 
free-living fungus, when strong selection and a high encounter 
rate were imposed (Leu and Murray 2006). However, the life cycle 
of Saccharomyces yeasts is unknown in nature and it is unclear 
whether such prezygotic isolation would be expected in natural 
populations. Our research focuses on two Saccharomyces species, 
S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus. 
They can be collected in woodlands and cultured in the laboratory, 
making them an ideal system for ecological and evolutionary 
studies (Replansky et al. 2008). These yeasts have a 
haplodiplontic life cycle; asexual growth can occur in both the 
haploid and diploid vegetative phase. Under nutrient limiting conditions, 
diploid cells undergomeiosis forming four stress-resistant 
haploid spores encased in an ascus. When conditions become favorable, 
spores germinate and become metabolically active cells 
once again. Mating occurs when haploid cells of opposite mating 
type (a and a) fuse. Woodland isolates of both species are 
homothallic, meaning that haploid cells can switch mating types 
after budding off a daughter cell. Because those cells are then 
compatible mates, the haploid stage is probably transient in natural 
populations; S. paradoxus and woodland S. cerevisiae isolates 
are invariably diploid. Despite the strong cost to hybridization, 
these yeasts can mate across species boundaries in the laboratory, 
suggesting the compatibility of the mating systems and leaving 
open the question of how they may avoid each other in nature. 
Initial studies of the mating dynamics of S. cerevisiae and 
S. paradoxus have yielded intriguing results. First, in an analysis 
of mating behavior of four sympatric woodland strains of 
S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus, Murphy et al. (2006) found that 
prezygotic reproductive isolation may exist in the form of differential 
mating kinetics. In cell-to-cell mate choice trials of vegetative 
cells, they found S. cerevisiae mated with itself significantly 
more than would be expected if mate choice were random. Surprisingly, 
S. paradoxus also mated significantly more with S. cerevisiae. 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mated faster than S. paradoxus, 
and was more likely to mate overall; the mating propensities accounted 
for the outcome of the mate choice trials. It appeared that 
when an S. paradoxus cell was offered both S. paradoxus and S. 
cerevisiae cells as potential partners, the S. cerevisiae cell, with 
its high mating propensity, controlled the interaction resulting in 
an inappropriate mating. Prezygotic isolation in nature may be a 
simple result of these mating propensity differences. Although interesting, 
these results were based on only two strains per species 
and may simply be strain effects rather than a species effect. 
Second, Maclean and Greig (2008) performed mate choice 
trials on five pairs of S. paradoxus and S. cerevisiae strains, including 
those used by Murphy et al. (2006). When given the 
choice between their own strain and the other species, spores of 
both species were more likely to mate with their own strain than 
would be expected if mating occurred randomly. Furthermore, 
they found that S. cerevisiae was choosier than S. paradoxus. 
They hypothesized that these results were due to differences in 
germination timing. Although the results showed a clear pattern 
of prezygotic isolation, there was no evidence of species-level 
mating discrimination. Their study assayed only five individual 
interspecific pairings, leaving open the possibility of strain effects 
or more importantly, that Saccharomyces species tend to inbreed 
in the spore stage regardless of the origin of the other potential 
mating partner. 
The goal of the present studywas to determine whether prezygotic 
isolation exists in the form of mating discrimination among 
natural yeast populations. We completed an exhaustive mating 
analysis including within-species dynamics of a large sample 
of woodland isolates from sympatric populations to address this 
question. 
The two sympatric woodland populations used in this study 
are described in detail elsewhere (Kuehne 2005); we will briefly 
summarize them here. In eastern North America, S. cerevisiae 
exhibits a clonal population structure, with three main haplotypes 
dispersed among numerouswoodlands, with somewoodlands and 
even single trees containing multiple haplotypes. Microsatellite 
divergence was detected within haplotypes that was associated 
with woodland collection site. To distinguish between the haplotypes 
in this study, we arbitrarily label them genetic group A, B, 
and C. Second, S. paradoxus exhibited two genetically isolated 
EVOLUTION APRIL 2012 1197

H. A. MURPHY AND C. W. ZEYL 
populations within North America: a large recombining population 
found throughout the sampled woodlands and a smaller 
clonal population that appeared to have migrated from Europe 
and whose range is limited to a few woodland sites (Kuehne 
et al. 2007). Following the convention of Kuehne et al. (2007), we 
refer to the migrant population as genetic group A and the large 
recombining population as genetic group B. The two S. paradoxus 
genetic groups within North America exhibit their own 
nonrandom mating dynamics (H. A. Murphy and C. W. Zeyl, 
unpubl. ms.) and will not be discussed here. Rather, we focus on 
the species-level interactions between populations of S. cerevisiae 
and S. paradoxus that are known to inhabit the same woodlands. 
Materials and Methods 
COLLECTION OF STRAINS 
The strains and sampling method are described in detail elsewhere 
(Sniegowski et al. 2002;Kuehne 2005;Kuehne et al. 2007). 
Briefly, oak flux (or surrounding soil) was sampled in a number of 
woodlands in eastern North America and passed through a series 
of media that favored growth of Saccharomyces yeasts. From each 
environmental sample, one putative yeast colony was isolated and 
crossed with known tester strains to determine species membership. 
Later genetic analyses on nine loci confirmed species identity. 
All isolates were stored in 15% glycerol at -80.C. For the 
current study, we chose six strains available from each population 
to be analyzed. 
MEDIA 
For growth and mating, we used synthetic oak exudate (SOE), 
a medium developed to loosely approximate oak exudate 
(Murphy et al. 2006) that contains 1% sucrose, 0.5% fructose, 
0.5% dextrose, 0.15% peptone, 0.1% yeast extract, and 2% agar 
for solid medium. For sporulation, we first grew cultures in Yeast 
Peptone Dextrose (YPD): 2% dextrose, 1% yeast extract, 2% 
peptone, and then transferred to sporulation plates: 1% potassium 
acetate, 0.005% zinc acetate, and 2% agar (Rose et al. 1990). 
For selection of transformants and identification of mated pairs, 
growth medium was supplemented with 150 µg/mL G418, 50 
µg/mL CloNat, or 400 µg/mL hygromycin, as appropriate. 
CONSTRUCTION OF YEAST STRAINS 
The natural isolates were all homothallic; to perform mating assays, 
heterothallic strains were required. The natural isolates were 
transformed using a standard lithium acetate procedure (Gietz and 
Woods 2002) or a modified protocol for low transformation efficiency 
strains (Gerke et al. 2006) with KanMX4 (Wach et al. 
1994), NatMX4, or HygMX4 (Goldstein and McCusker 1999) 
cassettes targeted to the HO gene. Successful transformants were 
sporulated and the resulting tetrads dissected. From each natural 
isolate, stable a and a kanamycin-resistant strains from the same 
ascus were identified and stored in 15% glycerol. These haploid 
strains were then transformed with a different cassette to construct 
isogenic strains with different antibiotic markers. Diploids 
homozygous for an antibiotic resistance were created by mating a 
and a strains, which preserved the original genetic composition. 
Two complete sets of strains with different antibiotic resistances 
were created; transformations were polymerase chain reaction 
verified (Tables 1 and 2). 
SPORE VIABILITY 
Diploid colonies from the mate choice trials described belowwere 
sporulated. Asci were digested using a standard zymolyase procedure 
(Rose et al. 1990) and dissected on SOE plates. For each 
original colony, approximately 32 spores were laid out in a gridlike 
pattern. The plates were incubated at 30.C for 72 h, when the 
numbers of colonies visible to the naked eye were recorded. For 
most strain combinations, the spore viability was assayed for two 
to five orginal zygotes. However, for some strain combinations of 
interspecies hybrid mating, only one zygote was assayed due to 
poor sporulation. The data were analyzed using a one-way nested 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with planned comparisons in 
JMP Version 8.0.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). 
MATE CHOICE TRIALS: VEGETATIVE CELLS 
Liquid cultures were grown overnight in 5-mL SOE at 30.C in a 
shaking incubator. Small amounts (approximately 10 µL of 1:100 
dilution) of each of three cultures were placed in separate drops 
on an SOE plate and used as the source pools to set up mate 
choice trials. Using a micromanipulator and Zeiss Axioskop FS 
microscope, approximately 16–20 trials were set up at marked 
locations on each plate. For each trial, a focal cell (either a or a) 
was placed in contact in a triangle formation with two cells of 
the other mating type, each with a different antibiotic resistance; 
one cell was derived from the same strain as the focal strain and 
the other from a different strain. Mating plates were incubated at 
30.C for 3–4 h, after which for each trial, the budding haploid cell 
was separated from the zygote and moved to a marked location 
on the plate. Once colonies formed approximately two days later, 
the plates were replica plated to antibiotic plates to determine 
that cells had mated. To account for possible effects of plate or 
assay date, for all strain combinations, mate choice trials were 
performed on multiple plates over multiple days. Only trials that 
contained budding haploid cells were used for analysis, as this 
ensured a choice between two viable mating partners. 
Because the mating types of the cells were known, all trials 
offered the focal cell two partners of opposite mating type and 
thus were informative. Therefore, if mating occurred randomly, 
50% of the time the focal cell would have mated with the partner 
1198 EVOLUTION APRIL 2012

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
Table 1. Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. Genetic groups A, B, and C refer to the three haplotype found in the woodland population of S. cerevisiae. The letters were assigned 
arbitrarily to indicate genetically similar isolates. Two sets of transformants were created from the original isolates: one with kanamycin resistance and one with either hygromycin 
(H) or CloNat (N) resistance. In the latter case, the letters next to strain numbers indicate resistance. 
Species/ Collection Original ho::KAN ho::KAN ho::HYG/ ho::HYG/ Diploid ho:: Diploid ho:: 
haplotypea location strainb MATa MATa NAT MATa NAT MATa HYG/NAT HYG/NAT 
Sc/A (1) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS670 YPS3060c YPS3062c YPS3332c N YPS3340cN YMZ32 YMZ33N 
Sc/A (2) New Brunswick, NJ YPS630 YPS2073 YPS2076 YMZ47 YMZ53 H YMZ39 YMZ56 H 
Sc/B (3) New Brunswick, NJ YPS615 YPS2057 YPS2058 YPS3343 N YPS3326 N YMZ34 YMZ35 N 
Sc/B (4) New Brunswick, NJ YPS623 YPS2066 YPS2063 YMZ44 H YMZ45 H YMZ38 YMZ50 H 
Sc/C (5) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS681 YPS3137c YPS3138c YPS3317c N YPS3318cN YMZ30 YMZ31N 
Sc/C (6) Media, PA YPS133 YPS2067 YPS2070 YMZ52 H YMZ10 H YMZ36 YMZ55 H 
aThe number in parentheses refers to the label given to the strains in the figures of this article. 
bAs described in Sniegowski et al. (2002) and Kuehne (2005). 
cAs described in Murphy et al. (2006). 
Table 2. Saccharomyces paradoxus strains. Genetic group A refers to migrants from Eurasia; B refers to original North American population. 
Species/genetic Collection Original ho::KAN ho::KAN ho::NAT ho::NAT Diploid Diploid 
groupa location strainb MATa MATa MATa MATa ho::KAN ho::NAT 
Sp/A (1) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS642 YPS3421 YPS3422 YPS3385 YPS3386 YMZ16 YMZ17 
Sp/A (2) Tuscarora Forest, PA YPS744 YMZ1 YMZ2 YPS3430 YPS3431 YMZ18 YMZ19 
Sp/A (3) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS644 YMZ26 YMZ27 YMZ24 YMZ25 YMZ29 YMZ28 
Sp/B (4) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS664 YPS3399c YPS3400c YPS3417c YPS3418c YMZ11 YMZ12 
Sp/B (5) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS646 YPS3420c YPS3419c YPS3405c YPS3406c YMZ14 YMZ13 
Sp/B (6) Buck Hill Falls, PA YPS668 YPS3392 YMZ72 YPS3395 YPS3396 YMZ73 YMZ15 
aThe number in parentheses refers to the label given to the strains in the figures of this article. 
bAs described in Sniegowski et al. (2002) and Kuehne (2005). 
cAs described in Murphy et al. (2006). 
EVOLUTION APRIL 2012 1199

H. A. MURPHY AND C. W. ZEYL 
0 
0.25 
0.5 
0.75 
1 
Sc Sp Sc X Sc Sp X Sp Sc X Sp 
proportion of viable spores 
Selfed Outcrossed 
Figure 1. Spore viability y-axis: proportion of visible colonies after 
72 h of growth. The number of strain combinations in each 
category is 6, 6, 14, 6 (only within S. paradoxus genetic group 
strain combinations were analyzed), and 36 in order from Sc to 
Sc × Sp. Selfing refers to spore viability of a strain when inbred; 
outcrossing refers to spore viability of matings between strains. 
Hybrid spore viability is significantly lower than within-species 
spore viability (P < 0.0001). 
of the same strain. If the focal cellmates with the alternative strain 
less than 50% of the time, then it has a bias either toward mating 
with itself or against the alternative strain. The opposite is true if 
the focal cell mates with the alternative strain more than 50% of 
the time. 
MATE CHOICE TRIALS: SPORES 
Cultures were grown for 24–48 h in 3-mL YPD in a shaking incubator 
at 30.C, then spread on sporulation plates and incubated for 
24–48 h. Asci were partially digested using a standard zymolyase 
procedure. Small amounts of digested asci (approximately 10 µL 
of 1:100 dilution) from two strains with different antibiotic resistances 
were placed in separate drops on an SOE plate and used a 
source pools for the mate choice trials. Using a micromanipulator 
and Zeiss Axioskop FS microscope, approximately 24–32 trials 
were set up at marked locations on each plate. For each trial, two 
spores from one strain and a third spore from the other strain 
were placed in contact in a triangle formation. After incubation 
at 30.C for approximately 6 h, the zygote and unmated cell were 
separated. Once colonies formed approximately two days later, 
the mating plates were replica plated to antibiotic plates to determine 
that spores had mated. As with vegetative cells, for all 
strain combinations, mate choice trials were performed on multiple 
plates and days with independent sporulated cultures. Only 
trials in which the unmated spore formed a colony were used for 
analysis, as this indicated that both potential partners had been 
viable spores. 
Because themating types of the spores were unknown, not all 
trials were informative (see Fig. 4A). If mating occurred randomly, 
then 66% of the time the focal spore would have mated with the 
partner from the alternative strain. If the focal sporemates with the 
alternative strain less than 66% of the time, then it either has a bias 
toward mating with itself or a bias against the alternative strain. 
The opposite is true if the focal spore mates with the alternative 
strain more than 66% of the time. 
MATE CHOICE TRIALS: ANALYSIS 
To test for deviations from random mating between species, binomial 
distributions corresponding to the null hypothesis of random 
mating were compared with the 0.025, 0.5, and 0.975 quantiles of 
binomial distributions that were calculated using the open-source 
software R. In calculating those quantiles, mate choice results 
from vegetative cells and from spores were pooled across groups 
and strains for each species. The results were also analyzed by logistic 
regression using function glm in R (Gelman and Hill 2007). 
The model fitted to interspecific trials was 
logit (probability of hybridization) 
= ß0 +ßstage +ßchooser.species + ßstage * chooser.species +achooser.group 
+aoption.group +a.chooser.group * option.group, 
where the function logit (x) = x/(1 – x) transforms probabilities, 
which are constrained to lie between 0 and 1, to an unbounded 
scale.
For each species independently, the following model was 
fitted to the pooled results of intraspecific spore and vegetative 
cell trials: 
logit (probability of hybridization) 
= ß0 +ßstage +achooser.group +aoption.group 
+a.chooser.group * option.group. 
Coefficients ß estimate the effects of binary predictors such as 
species identity or life cycle stage: ßstage = 1 indicates spore as 
opposed to vegetative cell and ßspecies = 1 indicates S. paradoxus 
choosing. Error terms a indicate the contributions to variation 
in mate choice of hierarchical categories such as genetic group 
within species and strain within genetic group. 
STAGGERED MATE CHOICE TRIALS 
These trials were similar to the spore mate choice trials, except 
that the pools of S. cerevisiae asci were put down up to 4 h later 
than S. paradoxus asci. All plates for all time points were begun 
at the same time by putting down pools of S. paradoxus asci and 
isolating from them all the spores necessary for the mate choice 
trials. For time point zero, the S. cerevisiae strain was put down 
at the same time as the S. paradoxus and set up as described in 
section “Mate Choice Trials:Spores.” For all other time points, S. 
cerevisiae spores were put on the plate 1, 2, 3, or 4 h after the S. 
paradoxus spores and only then did the spores come into contact 
with one another. 
1200 EVOLUTION APRIL 2012

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
50% 50% 
a 
50% 50% 
a a 
or 
A B
D
Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 
S. cerevisiae S. paradoxus 
A B C A B 
Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 
S. cerevisiae S. paradoxus 
A B C A B 
outcrossing frequency 
C 
hybridization frequency 
hybridization frequency 
0.5 
0.4 
0.6 
density 
1
0.75 
0.5 
0.25 
0
1
0.75 
0.5 
0.25 
0 
Figure 2. Mate choice in vegetative cells (A) vegetative mate choice trial. A focal cell of one mating type is given the option of mating 
with two cells of opposite mating type one from its own strain and one from a different strain/species. Because the mating type of all 
cells in the trial is known, if mating is random, over numerous trials, the focal cell should mate with each of the choices 50% of the time. 
(B) Within-population mating. Y-axis is the proportion of outcrossing events out of the total number of mate choice trials conducted for 
a given strain combination. Each strain was given the choice between (1) mating with a partner of its own strain or (2) an alternative 
partner of the same population. Each S. cerevisiae strain was tested against a random subset of strains in its population and each 
S. paradoxus strain was tested against the other two strains of its genetic group (A and B); for each species, there were 758 and 566 trials, 
respectively, for an average of 47 trials per strain combination. Average responses for choosing strains are given by black diamonds for 
S. cerevisiae and gray circles for S. paradoxus; results of the individual strain combinations are open symbols. On the left of each panel is 
the average for the given species ±2 SEM (the proportion of hybridization for each pairwise combination was considered one datapoint). 
Random mating is represented by the black line. (C) Binomial probability density functions for interspecies trials. The curves represent 
the expected (null) distribution of hybridized trials for the number of trials performed, if mating is random. The vertical bars represent 
the median (with 2.5% and 97.5% binomial quantiles at the base of the line) of the actual observations. Black line—S. cerevisiae; gray 
line—S. paradoxus. (D) Interspecies mating. Y-axis is the proportion of hybridization events out of the total number of mate choice trials 
conducted for a given strain combination. All S. cerevisiae strains were tested against all S. paradoxus strains, and vice versa. There were 
2724 mate choice trials over the 72 mating combinations, for an average of 35 trials per combination. Symbols as described in B. 
GERMINATION TIMING 
Strains were sporulated as described above. Ten to 20 spores 
from each strain were placed on an SOE plate and incubated at 
30.C; germination and budding were monitored every half hour 
for 510 min. As soon as germination was visible for a spore, 
the time was recorded; monitoring continued through the appearance 
of the first bud projection. For each strain, the assay was 
performed on multiple sporulated cultures, and to avoid possible 
variation among batches of medium/plates, all strains were assayed 
on the same batch of plates. Spores that germinated, but 
did not bud within the 540 min but subsequently formed visible 
colonies were recorded as having budded in 570 min. Although 
570 min is a conservative estimate, there was no practical way 
to determine how long budding actually took. Most such delayed 
germination/budding occurred in S. paradoxus strains. The 
data were analyzed using ANOVA in JMP 8.0.1. There were two 
stages to the cell cycle (germination and budding), two species, 
five genetic groups (three nested in S. cerevisiae and two nested in 
S. paradoxus), 12 strains (three nested in each S. paradoxus genetic 
group and two nested in each S. cerevisiae genetic group), 
and anywhere from 15 to 40 (average 29) replicates of each strain 
at each stage depending on how many spores were viable. 
EVOLUTION APRIL 2012 1201

H. A. MURPHY AND C. W. ZEYL 
0 
0.25 
0.5 
0.75 
1 
1 2 3 4 5 24 
proportion mated colonies 
time (hours) 
/ / 
/ / 
/ / 
0 
0.25 
0.5 
0.75 
1 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
proportion germinated 
time (hours) 
A
B 
Figure 3. Mating speed and germination time in Saccharomyces. 
Black represents S. cerevisiae; gray represents S. paradoxus. (A) 
Mating time in vegetative cells. For each strain, equal numbers of 
a and a cells were combined on a mating plate and the proportion 
of mated cells was monitored over time. Y-axis: proportion 
of population sample that had mated. For each species, the proportion 
of mated cells was averaged over all strains (± 2 SEM). 
(B) Spore germination. Time required to germinate and bud was 
monitored for spores of each strain. Y-axis: cumulative proportion 
of observed spores that germinated (squares) or projected a bud 
(circles) in a given 1-h time interval; strain results were averaged 
to obtain species results. 
MATING PROPENSITY 
Cultures were grown overnight in 5-mL SOE in a shaking incubator, 
centrifuged, washed, resuspended in H2O, and briefly 
sonicated to break up any clumps. For each strain, equal numbers 
of a and a cells with different antibiotic resistances were combined, 
poured onto 60-mm SOE plates, and dried in a sterile flow 
hood. Mating plates were incubated at 30.C and sampled every 
hour for 5 h, as well as once at 24 h. Each mating plate was sampled 
three times at each time point by scraping up small amounts 
of culture from three locations on the plate and suspended in water. 
The samples were diluted and spread onto an SOE plate; the 
number of colonies per platewas variable due to the inexact nature 
of scraping up cells from the mating plate and ranged anywhere 
from 60 to 250 colonies. Forty-eight hours later, the sample plates 
were replica plated to double antibiotic plates to determine the 
proportion ofmated colonies. Tominimize variation due to experimental 
error, the mating propensity assay was performed on all 
isolates at the same time. Data were analyzed using a nested twoway 
ANOVA in JMP 8.0.1. There were five time points (1–5 h), 
two species, 12 strains (six nested in each species), and three 
replicates of the measure of proportion of mated colonies for each 
strain at each time point. Three of the plates were not counted due 
to contamination. 
Results 
As with other interspecies crosses of S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus 
(Naumov 1987, 1996), among our strains, spores derived 
from hybrids were almost completely inviable (Fig. 1; 
P < 0.0001), thus verifying the cost to mismating. 
VEGETATIVE CELLS 
Our results generally support a previous report that vegetative 
cells of both species tend to mate with vegetative S. cerevisiae 
cells (Murphy et al. 2006), although individual strain combinations 
varied (Fig. 2C,D; Table 3). This could simply result from a 
tendency of S. cerevisiae to inbreed and S. paradoxus to outcross, 
rather than discrimination against potential S. paradoxus partners, 
but intraspecific mate choice trials do not support this explanation. 
We tested it by allowing vegetative cells to choose between 
potential mates of their own strain and a different strain either 
from their own genetic group or from a different genetic group, 
but from the same species. In these assays, mating preferences 
varied among strain combinations (Table 4). Most S. cerevisiae 
strains did discriminate based on the genetic group (haplotype) 
of the alternative partner, but with no trend toward inbreeding: 
three strains tended to choose genetic groups other than their 
own, whereas the other three preferred mates of their own genetic 
group (Fig. 2B). In S. paradoxus, there were specific pairwise interactions 
among strains (Table 5) and even a tendency toward 
inbreeding (Fig. 2B, right panel). When the alternative partner 
was from the other genetic group, S. paradoxus strains mated in 
idiosyncratic patterns (data not shown, H. A. Murphy and C. W. 
Zeyl, unpubl. ms.). We conclude that the tendency of vegetative 
cells of both species to mate with S. cerevisiae is not explained 
by S. cerevisiae inbreeding or by S. paradoxus outcrossing. 
Next, we determined whether mating propensity in all 12 
strains could explain the preference of vegetative cells of both 
species for S. cerevisiae mates. Saccharomyces cerevisiae mated 
more quickly (Fig. 3A, Table 6) and was more likely to mate overall 
than S. paradoxus (one-way nested ANOVA at 24-h time point, 
F = 14.67, P = 0.004, df = 1, 9). There was significant variation 
among S. paradoxus strains, and the difference between the 
species was smaller than in previously reported assays (Murphy 
1202 EVOLUTION APRIL 2012

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
A
C 
B 
Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 
S. cerevisiae S. paradoxus 
A B C A B 
Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 Avg 1 2 3 4 5 6 
A B C A B 
S. cerevisiae S. paradoxus 
D 
33.3% 66.6% 
? 
? ? 
a 
a 
a
a a a 
a 
a a a 
a 
a 
-- -- 
outcrossing frequency 
0.5 
0.7 
0.6 
0.8 
hybridization frequency 
hybridization frequency 
density 
1
0.75 
0.5 
0.25 
0
1
0.75 
0.5 
0.25 
0 
Figure 4. Mate choice in spores (A) sporemate choice trial. Two spores of one strain (focal strain) and one spore of another strain/species 
were placed together; mating types of the spores were unknown. There were eight possible combinations of mating types and strains 
(shown in bottom two rows of panel). Two of the combinations could not lead to mating because all spores were of one mating type 
(denoted by X) and two required outcrossing because the alternative strain was the only compatible mating partner (denoted by –). 
The final four combinations allowed a choice to be made (denoted by 
v
). If mating occurred randomly, over numerous trials, the focal 
strain should outcross 66% of the time (four out of six successful matings would be outcrossed). (B) Within-population mating. Y-axis 
is the proportion of outcrossing events out of the total number of mate choice trials conducted for a given strain combination. Each 
S. cerevisiae strain was tested against the other six strains in its species; there were 754 trials for an average of 25 trials per strain 
combination. Each S. paradoxus strain was tested against the other two strains of its genetic group (A and B); there were 273 mate 
choice trials for an average of 23 trials per strain combination. Symbols as described in 2B. (C) Binomial probability density functions 
for interspecies trials. The curves represent the expected (null) distribution of hybridized trials for the number of trials performed, if 
mating is random. The vertical bars represent the median (with 2.5% and 97.5% binomial quantiles at the base of the line) of the actual 
observations. Black line—S. cerevisiae; gray line—S. paradoxus. (D) Interspecies mating. Y-axis is the proportion of hybridization events 
out of the total number of mate choice trials conducted for a given strain combination. All S. cerevisiae strains were tested against all 
S. paradoxus strains, and vice versa. There were 2202 mate choice trials over the 72 strain combinations, for an average of 30 trials per 
combination. Symbols as described in 2B. 
et al. 2006). However, S. cerevisiae consistently mated more 
quickly and was more likely to mate, which may explain the 
results of the mate choice trials. 
SPORES 
Spores of both species were more likely to mate with a spore of 
their own strain than with one of the other species, as reported by 
Maclean and Greig (2008) for fewer strain combinations. Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae was by far the more discriminating species, 
but the overall hybridization frequency of S. paradoxus spores 
was significantly less than would result from random mating 
(Fig. 2B,C, right panel; Table 3). Hybridizationwas detected more 
often for spores of both species than for vegetative cells, as indicated 
by the positive logistic regression coefficient ßspore = 0.48 
(Table 3). This does not mean, however, that spores were less discriminating. 
Because the mating types of spores in mating trials 
were unknown, if mating were random we would have observed 
a hybridization rate of two of three among spores, a frequency 
16.7% higher than among randomly mating vegetative cells (see 
Materials and Methods). We therefore compare the observed effect 
of the spore stage on hybridization probability with the null 
hypothesis of a probability 17% higher than that for vegetative 
cells. A logistic regression coefficient can be converted to an effect 
of a unit change in the predictor variable on the probability of 
an observation by dividing the coefficient by 4 (Gelman and Hill 
2007); here, this is the increase in probability of hybridization 
EVOLUTION APRIL 2012 1203

H. A. MURPHY AND C. W. ZEYL 
Table 3. Logistic regression of mate choice in interspecies trials. Coefficients ß (and standard errors) are effects of chooser species 
(S. paradoxus = 1, S. cerevisiae = 0) and life cycle stage (spore = 1, vegetative cell = 0) on probability of hybridization. Error terms a 
(and standard errors) attribute variation to group and strain within-group identities of choosers and options, and their interactions. 
Effect Coefficient (standard error) Inference 
Intercept ß0 =-0.48 (0.09) 
Species choosing ßspecies = 0.98 (0.13) Hybridization is more likely when S. paradoxus is choosing 
Life cycle stage ßstage = 0.48 (0.08) Outcrossing is detected more often among spores than 
vegetative cells 
Species×stage interaction ßspecies ×stage =-0.47 (0.12) Choosing as a spore increases hybridization probability less in 
S. paradoxus than in S. cerevisiae 
Variance component Inference 
Genetic group choosing schooser.group = 0.04 Very little variation in mate choice among genetic groups 
Genetic group of alternative salternative.group = 0.00 
Choosing×alternative group 
interaction 
schooser.group×alternative.group = 0.08 
Strain choosing schooser.strain = 0.12 Strains vary in behavior as choosers, and some pairwise 
combinations are slightly more likely to hybridize than others 
Alternative strain salternative.strain = 0.05 
Choosing×alternative strain 
interaction 
schooser×alternative = 0.09 
Table 4. Logistic regression of mate choice among S. cerevisiae groups. Notation is as in Table 3. 
Effect Coefficient (standard error) Inference 
Intercept ß0 = 0.01 (0.12) Outcrossing is detected more often among spores than among 
vegetative cells 
Life cycle stage ßstage = 0.59 (0.11) 
Variance component Inference 
Genetic group choosing schooser.group = 0.00 No variation in outcrossing rates is attributable to group 
identity. 
Genetic group of alternative salternative.group = 0.00 
Choosing×alternative group 
interaction 
schooser.group×alternative.group = 0.00 
Strain choosing schooser.strain = 0.16 Outcrossing frequencies vary among strains and strain 
combinations 
Alternative strain salternative.strain = 0.14 
Choosing×alternative strain 
interaction 
schooser×alternative = 0.10 
associated with switching from vegetative cells to spores. Thus, 
we estimate the spore effect to be approximately 12%, below 
the null expectation. A strongly negative interaction term indicates 
that the stronger avoidance of hybridization by spores than 
by vegetative cells is less pronounced in S. paradoxus than in 
S. cerevisiae. 
Unlike the previous study on spore mating, we tested the 
behavior of spores within their own species. Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
and group A S. paradoxus spores mated randomly within 
their genetic groups (Fig. 4B), and in the case of S. cerevisiae, 
among genetic groups as well. Random mating by both S. cerevisiae 
and S. paradoxus group A in intraspecific trials indicates 
that the lack of hybridization in interspecies trials was due to 
mating discrimination rather than an overall tendency of those 
Saccharomyces spores to inbreed. 
Saccharomyces paradoxus group B unexpectedly discriminated 
more strongly against S. paradoxus from the other genetic 
group than it did against S. cerevisiae (compare the right 
1204 EVOLUTION APRIL 2012

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
Table 5. Logistic regression of mate choice among S. paradoxus groups. Notation is as in Table 3. 
Effect Coefficient (standard error) Inference 
Intercept ß0 = 0.10 (0.16) Outcrossing is detected more often among spores than 
vegetative cells 
Life cycle stage ßstage = 0.38 (0.18) 
Variance component Inference 
Genetic group choosing schooser.group = 0.00 Outcrossing rates do not vary among groups, but some 
pairwise combinations of groups show higher outcrossing 
rates than do other pairs of groups 
Genetic group of alternative salternative.group = 0.00 
Choosing×alternative group 
interaction 
schooser.group×alternative.group = 0.30 
Strain choosing schooser.strain = 0.00 Outcrossing probability does not vary among strains, but some 
strain pairings outcross more often than others 
Alternative strain salternative.strain = 0.00 
Choosing×alternative strain 
interaction 
schooser×alternative = 0.27 
Table 6. Mating propensity ANOVA. Proportion of mated 
colonies at each time point was analyzed. Strain was designated a 
random effect. Note that S. cerevisiae mates more (species effect) 
and mates more quickly (species × time effect). 
Source SS MS df F value Pr>F 
Species 0.568 0.568 1 7.69 0.0196 
Time 4.330 1.083 4 65.17 <0.0001 
Strain (species) 0.741 0.074 10 4.45 0.0003 
Species×time 0.169 0.042 4 2.54 0.0541 
Strain 
(species)×time 
0.667 0.017 40 2.01 0.0019 
Residual 1.017 0.008 118 – – 
SS, sums of squares; MS, mean square. 
panels of Fig. 4B,D). The spores of this group, like its vegetative 
cells, tended to inbreed in intraspecific trials. Logistic regression 
indicated that they were 7% more likely to hybridize with S. cerevisiae 
than to outcross with group A S. paradoxus (proportion of 
hybrids: 0.53 vs. 0.65; F = 16.99, P = 0.054, df = 1, 2; strain 
and strain × species effects were not significant, P = 0.63, P = 
0.39, respectively). 
GERMINATION TIMING 
We tested the hypothesis that the observed pattern of mating in 
interspecies sporemate choice trialswas due to a difference in germination 
timing. We estimated germination times for 163 spores 
from the six strains of S. paradoxus and a total of 158 spores from 
the six strains of S. cerevisiae. Saccharomyces cerevisiae spores 
germinated and budded significantly faster than those of S. paradoxus 
(Fig. 3B,Table 7). There was significant variation among 
strains, but not between the genetic groups. When specifically 
comparing S. paradoxus groups A and B, there was no significant 
difference (planned contrast, P = 0.364). Saccharomyces 
paradoxus spores did not begin germinating until approximately 
75% of all S. cerevisiae spores already had, and even then, it was 
only a small fraction (6%) that did. Rather, S. paradoxus germination 
coincided with the appearance of the first S. cerevisiae bud 
projections. 
STAGGERED GERMINATION 
If different germination timing is indeed the mechanism by which 
the spores avoid mismating, then delaying the germination of S. 
cerevisiae may increase the frequency of interspecies matings. 
We tested this idea with mate choice trials in which S. cerevisiae 
was placed on the mating plate at the same time as S. paradoxus, 
as well as 1, 2, 3, and 4 h later (Fig. 5). There was an overall effect 
of time (repeated measures nested two-way ANOVA, F = 3.01, 
df = 4, 38, P = 0.03), as well as interaction between time and 
species (F = 3.24, df = 4, 38, P = 0.02), but no significant effect 
of species or strain combination (F = 2.16, df = 1, 14.5, P = 0.16 
and F = 1.67, df = 12, 38, P = 0.11, respectively). When placed 
down at the same time, both species were able to discriminate, as 
expected.With a 1-h delay of the faster germinator, S. cerevisiae, 
both strains were still able to discriminate properly. But a 2-h 
delay of S. cerevisiae, which should synchronize the germination 
time of the two species, led to random mating. After a 3-h delay, 
S. paradoxus could discriminate again, and with a 4-h delay, 
both species had recovered the ability to discriminate against 
inappropriate partners. Thus, synchronizing spore germination 
appeared to randomize mating (contrast: [0, 1, 3, 4 h] vs. 2 h; 
P = 0.003). 
EVOLUTION APRIL 2012 1205

H. A. MURPHY AND C. W. ZEYL 
Table 7. Germination timing. Time to germination and time to first bud projection for each spore was analyzed. Strain was designated 
a random effect. 
Source SS MS df F value Pr>F 
Species 1299413 1299413 1 188.1 0.0056 
Cell cycle 2527309 2527309 1 876.2 0.0003 
Genetic Group (species) 24067.9 8022.65 3 0.3912 0.7639 
Strain (species, genetic group) 159664 22809.2 7 5.8685 0.0163 
Species×cell cycle 3380 3380 1 1.172 0.3705 
Genetic group (species)×cell cycle 8875.12 2958.4 3 0.784 0.5368 
Strain (species, genetic group)×cell cycle 27206.8 3386.7 7 1.671 0.1132 
Residual 1437196.7 2326 619 – – 
0 
0.25 
0.5 
0.75 
1 
0 1 2 3 4 
hybridization frequency 
time Sc delayed (hours) 
Figure 5. Staggered germination spore mate choice black 
diamonds—S. cerevisiae is “chooser” strain; gray circles—S. paradoxus 
is “chooser” strain. Large symbols represent average species 
response. Y-axis is the proportion of hybridization events; x-axis is 
time in hours that S. cerevisiae spores were included in the mate 
choice trials after S. paradoxus. Seven random strain combinations 
were analyzed; the experiment included a 4-h delay for only 
three of them. For each strain combination, one mating plate was 
prepared per time point for each species, and each plate resulted 
in 9–23 successful trials (each mating plate is represented by one 
datapoint on graph). 
Discussion 
In both S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus, each mating type produces 
a mating type specific pheromone, as well as receptors for 
the pheromone produced by opposite mating type (Herskowitz 
1988); these pheromones show very little divergence between 
the species, although the receptors are slightly less well conserved 
(see Supplementary Material). Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
has been shown to discriminate among mating partners based on 
the amount of pheromone being produced (Jackson and Hartwell 
1990a,b), suggesting the possibility of sexual selection in yeast 
(Pagel 1993; Smith and Greig 2010). 
Very little is known about the life cycle of Saccharomyces 
yeasts in nature, as its growth in nature has not been observed. 
Population genetic and genomic analyses of S. paradoxus indicate 
that sexual cycles are rare, compared to mitotic reproduction, and 
that populations are highly inbred (Koufopanou et al. 2006; Tsai 
et al. 2008). Based on data from laboratory studies, it is thought 
that Saccharomyces yeasts exist predominantly in the diploid 
stage (Knop 2006) and are dispersed by insect vectors (Replansky 
et al. 2008). From genomic data alone, it is impossible to determine 
whether the inbreeding is behavioral, resulting from a 
preference of haploid cells for closely related mates, or an effect 
of highly structured populations in which potential mates 
are closely related because dispersal rates are low. Our results 
suggest the latter, as we observed no consistent preference in either 
species for mates from their own strain. Recent work has 
shown that when S. cerevisiae is ingested by Drosophila, vegetative 
yeast cells are destroyed, while spores pass through the 
digestive tract unharmed and able to mate randomly with higher 
rates of outcrossing (Reuter et al. 2007). This evidence, combined 
with observations of spores mating immediately after germination 
(Guilliermond 1905;Winge and Laustsen 1937), suggest that 
outcrossing opportunities are likely to arise in the spore stage of 
the life cycle after a dispersal event. However, because not all 
spores mate and asci often contain only three viable spores leaving 
one spore unmated, haploid vegetative cells may occasionally 
encounter each other, although this is probably rare. We assayed 
themating dynamics between sympatric woodland populations of 
S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus in both spores and vegetative cells 
and found evidence for strong differences in mating characteristics 
that could lead to prezygotic isolation between the species in 
nature. These differences are in mating and germination timing, 
not unlike the mechanisms of allochronic isolation observed in 
multicellular organisms (Coyne and Orr 2004). 
First, the mating behavior of vegetative cells was assayed 
in individual cell-to-cell mate choice trials. Our results showed 
that both species usually mate with S. cerevisiae, probably due to 
differences in mating propensity, confirming a previous observation 
based on two strains of each species (Murphy et al. 2006). 
As previously suggested, these timing differences may mediate 
a form of prezygotic isolation in which faster maters mate with 
1206 EVOLUTION APRIL 2012

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
each other, leaving the slower maters available only to each other. 
This form of prezygotic isolation has evolved in experimental 
laboratory populations in as few as 26 sexual cycles (Leu and 
Murray 2006). However, what is known of the life history of both 
S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus suggests that most encounters 
would be between spores rather than vegetative cells. If differences 
in spore germination timing are the main mechanism by 
which hybridization is avoided, the abundant variation in mating 
preferences that we observed among vegetative cells of S. cerevisiae 
may play little or no role in most mating behavior, and 
therefore be effectively neutral, or pleiotropic effects of alleles 
selected for their effects on other traits. 
Second, the mating behavior of spores was assayed in sporeto-
spore mate choice trials. Our results agree with those of 
Maclean and Greig (2008): spores mate with conspecific spores 
more than would be expected if mating occurred randomly, thus 
exhibiting a clear pattern of prezygotic isolation. In intraspecific 
mate choice trials, where spores chose between potential partners 
of their own strain of a different haplotype, some strains preferred 
or avoided others, but in neither species did spores tend to inbreed. 
Therefore, their tendency in interspecific trials not to hybridize is 
not the byproduct of a preference for close relatives, but rather an 
active discrimination against heterospecific spores. 
Unlike vegetative haploid cells, which constitutively produce 
pheromones and, upon sensing pheromone of the opposite mating 
type, increase their own production to begin the mating process 
(Bardwell 2004), dormant spores do not produce pheromones. 
Therefore, if spores of one species germinate before those of the 
other species, they will sense pheromone only from conspecifics. 
If such spores do not sense any pheromone upon germination 
(i.e., no appropriate mating partners), they will proceed through 
the cell cycle, effectively making mating impossible until mitotic 
reproduction is complete (Wittenberg and La Valle 2003). 
When the slower species begins germinating, it will also detect 
pheromone from conspecifics and be protected from mating with 
the wrong species, as those cells will be in the process of budding 
(Maclean andGreig 2008). To test this hypothesis, we investigated 
the amount of time it took for spores from the different strains 
to germinate and found very significant differences between the 
species, as well as strong synchronization within each species. 
Saccharomyces paradoxus spores did not begin germinating until 
almost all S. cerevisiae had finished. When S. paradoxus began 
germinating, S. cerevisiae already had visible bud projections, 
suggesting that the cells had committed to mitotic reproduction 
and were past the point in the cell cycle where mating would 
be possible (Kron and Gow 1995). To determine whether these 
differences in germination timing were indeed responsible for 
the observed prezygotic isolation in the spore mate choice trials, 
we delayed the germination time of S. cerevisiae to coincide 
with S. paradoxus germination. We found that a delay of 1 h 
did not change either species’ ability to discriminate; however, a 
delay of 2 h led to random mating by both species. After a 3-h 
delay, S. paradoxus had recovered its ability to discriminate and 
after a 4-h delay, both species were able to discriminate again. 
These results support the hypothesis that differences in germination 
timing underlie spore mate discrimination between these two 
populations. 
Do both species experience, and react similarly to, similar 
conditions in nature? Although we cannot perform an experimental 
test, we can address this issue with other data. First, these 
strains were all isolated from oak flux; in some instances, both 
species were isolated from the same tree, suggesting that they 
experience similar conditions. Second, they can ferment the same 
sugars and use nutrients similarly, and they grow at similar rates 
(data not shown). Finally, in the laboratory, both species are induced 
to sporulate and germinate by the same media and conditions. 
Isolation via germination timing in nature is therefore plausible. 
We acknowledge that we cannot conclude from our data 
that selection acted on the described mating traits for the purpose 
of reproductive isolation. The classic signature of displacement 
is greater prezygotic isolation in sympatry than in allopatry, but 
testing for this would require a much more fine-scale knowledge 
of yeast biogeography than is currently realistic. 
The prezygotic isolation we have documented here is incomplete, 
whether because selection against hybridization is patchy 
or inconsistent, or because it is still evolving. Our knowledge of 
yeast population biology still lags behind the vast resources of 
S. cerevisiae cell biology and genetics, which contributed to this 
study the ability to manipulate genotypes, mating types, and individual 
cells, but a recent surge of interest in natural populations, 
and the growing number of genome sequences, offer growing 
potential to connect the cellular and molecular details with the 
genetic structure and evolutionary history of yeast populations. 
This study is a step toward the genetic dissection of speciation in 
the largely neglected microbial eukaryotes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank P. Sniegowski and H. Kuehne for access to strains, and P. 
Sniegowski, J. N. Jasmin, and two anonymous reviewers for comments 
on an earlier version of the manuscript. This work was supported by 
National Science Foundation-DEB 0820969 to CWZ and HAM. 
 
Associate Editor: P. Turner 
1208 EVOLUTION APRIL 2012

ALLOCHRONIC REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN YEAST 
Supporting Information 
The following supporting information is available for this article: 
Figure S1: MFA1 
Figure S2: STE3 
Figure S3: MFAlpha1 
Figure S4: STE2 
Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article. 
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the 
authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article. 
EVOLUTION APRIL 2012 1209

