   Molecular Ecology (2011) 20, 3056–3070 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05093.x
A lectin-mediated resistance of higher fungi against predators and parasites
S. BLEULER-MARTI ́NEZ,* A. BUTSCHI,† M. GARBANI,* M. A. WA ̈ LTI,* T. WOHLSCHLAGER,* E. POTTHOFF,* J. SABOTICˆ ,‡ J. POHLEVEN,‡ P. LU ̈ THY,* M. O. HENGARTNER,† M. AEBI* and M. KU ̈ NZLER*
*Institute of Microbiology, Department of Biology, Eidgeno ̈ssische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zu ̈rich, CH-8093, Zu ̈rich, Switzerland, †Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zu ̈rich, CH-8057, Zu ̈rich, Switzerland, ‡Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jozˇef Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
Abstract
Fruiting body lectins are ubiquitous in higher fungi and characterized by being synthesized in the cytoplasm and up-regulated during sexual development. The function of these lectins is unclear. A lack of phenotype in sexual development upon inactivation of the respective genes argues against a function in this process. We tested a series of characterized fruiting body lectins from different fungi for toxicity towards the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the mosquito Aedes aegypti and the amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii. Most of the fungal lectins were found to be toxic towards at least one of the three target organisms. By altering either the fungal lectin or the glycans of the target organisms, or by including soluble carbohydrate ligands as competitors, we demonstrate that the observed toxicity is dependent on the interaction between the fungal lectins and specific glycans in the target organisms. The toxicity was found to be dose-dependent such that low levels of lectin were no longer toxic but still led to food avoidance by C. elegans. Finally, we show, in an ecologically more relevant scenario, that challenging the vegetative mycelium of Coprinopsis cinerea with the fungal-feeding nematode Aphelenchus avenae induces the expression of the nematotoxic fruiting body lectins CGL1 and CGL2. Based on these findings, we propose that filamentous fungi possess an inducible resistance against predators and parasites mediated by lectins that are specific for glycans of these antagonists.
Keywords: amoebozoa, carbohydrate, glycan, insect, nematode, toxicity
Received 22 October 2010; revision received 18 February 2011; accepted 23 February 2011
Introduction
Lectins are proteins of non-immune origin that specifically and reversibly bind carbohydrates. The physiological functions of lectins are very diverse (Dam & Brewer 2007; Nilsson 2007). A common theme that emerges from the described functions of many plant and animal lectins is their role, as effectors or regulators, in the interaction with other organisms, being it symbiosis or defence (Hooper & Gordon 2001; Vasta et al. 2007; De Hoff et al. 2009).
Correspondence: Markus Ku ̈ nzler, Fax: +41 44 6321148; E-mail: markus.kuenzler@micro.biol.ethz.ch
Many lectins have been identified and isolated from fruiting body-forming fungi of the phyla Basidiomycota and Ascomycota (Guillot & Konska 1997; Wang et al. 1998; Dam & Brewer 2007). Some of these so-called fruiting body lectins have been characterized biochemically and structurally (Imberty et al. 2005; Krengel & Imberty 2007). Characteristic features of this type of lectins are their water solubility, their synthesis in the cytoplasm (based on the lack of a signal peptide for classical secretion, disulphide bridges or ER-derived glycosylation) and their composition of one or more subunits of low molecular weight. Despite their extensive biochemical and structural characterization, the physiological function of these fungal lectins is not well understood. Some
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

fruiting body lectins were shown to have mitogenic, antiproliferative, antitumour, antiviral and immune-stimulating activity towards mammalian cells (Carrizo et al. 2005; Pohleven et al. 2009; Singh et al. 2010). With regard to the fungi themselves, proposed functions of fruiting body lectins are storage or roles in morphogenesis and development (Guillot & Konska 1997; Rosen et al. 1997). The latter functions are based on the temporal and spatial regulation of gene expression during fungal development. The synthesis of these lectins is often restricted to reproductive structures such as fruiting bodies or sclerotia, in which these proteins represent a high percentage of the total soluble protein content (Boulianne et al. 2000; Candy et al. 2001, 2003; Nowrousian & Cebula 2005; Walti et al. 2008). The experimental evidence for any of these functions, however, is scarce. On the contrary, the deletion and downregulation of fruiting body or sclerotia lectin-encoding genes in either ascoor homobasidiomycetes had no obvious effect on development (Nowrousian & Cebula 2005; Walti et al. 2006; Li & Rollins 2010). These findings, together with the fact that the determined carbohydrate specificities of fruiting body lectins do not fit to fungal glycans and that, accordingly, not a single endogenous carbohydrate ligand of such a lectin has been unequivocally identified, argue against an endogenous role of fruiting body lectins.
Lectins from plants have been extensively studied. Many plant lectins have been demonstrated to interact with carbohydrates of other organisms either in symbiosis or in defence processes (Peumans & Van Damme 1995a; Van Damme et al. 2004; De Hoff et al. 2009). One of the most important functions of plant lectins is their role as effectors in the defence against parasites and herbivores (Peumans & Van Damme 1995b; Murdock & Shade 2002; Vasconcelos & Oliveira 2004). It has been shown that plant lectins possess fungicidal, insecticidal and nematicidal properties and are also toxic to higher animals (Peumans & Van Damme 1995a,b; Oka et al. 1997; Macedo et al. 2002). The expression of these lectins is regulated both temporally and spatially. It can be either tissue-specific or systemic, constitutive or induced upon stress, herbivory or pathogen infection (Qin et al. 2003; Chen 2008; Subramanyam et al. 2008; Vandenborre et al. 2009). Some plant lectins are known to be secreted or stored in vacuoles, whilst others are known to be localized in the cytoplasm (Van Damme et al. 2004; Lannoo & Van Damme 2010). Genes encoding plant lectins have even been used in transgenic crops to confer resistance against insect pests, phytopathogenic nematodes and plant-pathogenic fungi (Burrows et al. 1998; Powell et al. 1998; Ripoll et al. 2003; Hogervorst et al. 2006). A well-studied example is the snowdrop lectin (GNA) that binds to terminal mannose residues on glycoproteins in
the gut of aphid larvae and other insects (Hogervorst et al. 2006; Trebicki et al. 2009).
Because fungi are similar to plants with regard to their non-motile nature, it is likely that they have evolved similar mechanisms to defend themselves against predators and parasites (Spiteller 2008; Rohlfs & Churchill 2011). Fungivory plays a significant role in shaping the structure and function of natural fungal communities and represent a strong selective force for the evolution of chemical defence systems in fungi (McGonigle 2007). Accordingly, a wide variety of chemical compounds, either constitutively produced or wound-activated, have been identified in fungi (Wicklow 1988; Spiteller 2008), and many of these secondary metabolites are believed to have evolved to protect saprophytic fungi from being used as a food source by amoebozoa, nematodes and other invertebrates (Rohlfs et al. 2007; Fox & Howlett 2008). On the other hand, it has been shown that proteins are responsible for most of the insecticidal activity of mushrooms (Wang et al. 2002). Accordingly, entomotoxic effects have been demonstrated for Xerocomus chrysenteron lectin (XCL) and Rhizoctonia solani agglutinin when added to the artificial diet of Drosophila melanogaster and Acrythosiphon pisum, and the cotton leafworm Spodoptera littoralis, respectively (Trigueros et al. 2003; Hamshou et al. 2009), as well as for the Sclerotinia sclerotiorum agglutinin (SSA) fed to A. pisum (Hamshou et al. 2010). In addition, some fruiting body lectins were recently reported to possess nematotoxic activity (Zhao et al. 2009; Butschi et al. 2010). In this work, we show that nematicidal, insecticidal and ⁄ or amoebicidal activities are common amongst fruiting body lectins both from ascomycetes and basidiomycetes. In addition, we demonstrate that the expression of two nematotoxic fruiting body lectins is induced in the vegetative mycelium of the homobasidiomycete Coprinopsis cinerea upon predation by a fungivorous nematode. Based on these results, we hypothesize that fruiting body lectins are part of an inducible resistance against predators and parasites, complementing the chemical defence systems of fungi.
Materials and methods
Strains and cultivation conditions
Escherichia coli strain DH5a was used for cloning and amplification of plasmids and strain BL21 (DE3) for bacterial expression of proteins and biotoxicity assays. E. coli was cultivated on LB medium as described (Sambrook & Russell 2001). Caenorhabditis elegans wild-type strain Bristol type (N2) and the mutant strain bre-1(ye4) were obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC, University of Minnesota, USA), and the mutant
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
FUNGAL RESISTANCE LECTINS 3057

3058 S. BLEULER-MART ́INEZ ET AL.
strain ger-1(op499) was described previously (Butschi et al. 2010). C. elegans was cultivated at room temperature on NGM plates with E. coli OP50 for normal breeding (Brenner 1974). The nematode Aphelenchus avenae was a gift of Richard Sikora (Universita ̈t Bonn, Germany) and was maintained on Fusarium oxysporum or Agaricus bisporus on PDA [0.4% (w ⁄ v) potato extract, 2% (w ⁄ v) dextrose, 1.5% (w ⁄ v) agar], or on Ashbya gossypii strains ATCC 10895 (wild type) or ADA8 (GFP-expressing strain) (Dunkler & Wendland 2007) on solid AFM [1% (w ⁄ v) yeast extract, 1% (w ⁄ v) peptone, 1.5% (w ⁄ v)agar, 2% glucose, 0.1% (w ⁄ v) myo-inositol] at 23 °C. Eggs of Aedes aegypti strain Rockefeller were kindly provided by the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute (Basel, Switzerland). Acanthamoeba castellanii (ATCC 30234) was cultivated axenically in liquid PYG medium [proteose peptone 0.75% (w ⁄ v), yeast extract (0.75% (w ⁄ v) and glucose 1.5% (w ⁄ v)] at 30 °C in tissue culture flasks under static conditions. Coprinopsis cinerea strains AmutBmut and Okayama 7 (Swamy et al. 1984) were maintained on 10% PDA or YMG solid medium [0.4% (w ⁄ v) yeast extract, 1% (w ⁄ v) malt extract, 0.4% (w ⁄ v) 1.5% agar] at 37 °C. Sclerotinia sclerotiorum strain S1954 (obtained from E. Van Damme, Ghent University, Belgium) was maintained on PDA at 25 °C.
Cloning and heterologous expression of fungal lectins in E. coli
We selected a total of seven fruiting body–specific lectins that were derived from six different fungal species
and had previously been characterized (Table 1). The cDNAs encoding the untagged lectins were all cloned into the pET24b vector (Novagen) (except for AAL that carried a His6-tag and was cloned in pET28b) under the control of the isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)-inducible T7-promoter. Cloning of CGL2 and CGL3, and AAL was described previously (Olausson et al. 2008; Walti et al. 2008). Cloning of His8-tagged and untagged TAP1 as well as of untagged XCL into pET24b was performed by amplifying the lectin-encoding cDNAs by PCR from source plasmids using primers that introduced NdeI and BamHI restriction sites at the 5¢and 3¢-ends, respectively, of the open reading frames (Table S5, Supporting information). For the cloning of SSA, RNA was extracted from mycelium of S. sclerotiorum using the RNeasy Lipid Tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen) following manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA was converted to cDNA, and the open reading frame was amplified using the OneStep RT–PCR Kit (Qiagen) and primers containing NdeI and BamHI restriction sites at the 5¢and 3¢-end, respectively (Table S5, Supporting information). The PCR fragments were ligated into the pGEMÒ-T Easy vector (Promega) according to manufacturer’s protocol and amplified in E. coli. The inserted cDNA was checked by sequencing and excised using the above-mentioned restriction sites and ligated in pET24b vector. In case of Clitocybe nebularis lectin (CNL), the fragment was excised directly from the original construct (Pohleven et al. 2009) using NdeI and BamHI restriction enzymes and ligated into pET24b. All plasmids were transformed into E. coli strain BL21
Table 1 Overview of the fungal lectins used for biotoxicity assays in this study Molecular
GenBank accession number
AAF34731 AAF34732
ABD64675 CAH03681 AAL73235 ACK56062 BAA12871 ABE97202
 Origin
Lectin (Species ⁄ Phylum)
CGL2 Coprinopsis cinerea ⁄ Basidiomycota
CGL3 Coprinopsis cinerea ⁄ Basidiomycota
TAP1 Sordaria macrospora ⁄ Ascomycota
XCL Xerocomus chrysenteron ⁄ Basidiomycota
CNL Clitocybe nebularis ⁄ Basidiomycota AAL Aleuria aurantia ⁄
Ascomycota
SSA Sclerotinia sclerotiorum ⁄
Ascomycota
Lectin family Galectin
Galectin-like Actinoporin-like* Actinoporin-like* Ricin-B b-propeller Ricin-B
weight (kDa)
16.7
19 16.1 15 15.9 33.4 17
Carbohydrate specificity
Galb1-4Glc (lactose) Galb1-4GlcNAc Galb1-4Fuc GlcNAcb1-4GlcNAc GalNAcb1-4GlcNAc Galb1-3GalNAc†
Galb1-3GalNAc‡ Terminal GlcNAc GalNAc
Fucose GalNAc ⁄ Gal
References
Walser et al. (2004);
Butschi et al. (2010) Walti et al. (2008)
Nowrousian & Cebula (2005); this work Trigueros et al. (2003); Damian et al. (2005) Pohleven et al. (2009)
Fujihashi et al. (2003); Wimmerova et al. (2003) Sulzenbacher et al. (2010)
  *Also designated ‘Mushroom Lectin family’ (Goldstein et al. 2007) or †This work (see Figs S3 and S4, Supporting information). ‡Confirmed by this work (see Fig. S4, Supporting information).
‘XCL family’ (Birck et al. 2004).
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

(DE3) for expression. Transformants were cultivated in LB medium containing 50 lg ⁄ mL kanamycin at 37 °C to OD600 = 1, induced with 0.5–1 mM IPTG and incubated over night at 23 °C. Solubility of the recombinant lectins was tested by disrupting the E. coli cells with 0.1-mm glass beads in PBS using a FastPrep instrument (Savant) and checking the lectin content in the supernatant after centrifugation (16 100 g for 30 min), compared to the whole cell extract of the lysate using SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining.
Biotoxicity assays of fungal lectins expressed in
E. coli
Biotoxicity assays for C. elegans, A. aegypti and A. castellanii were performed as previously described (Kunzler et al. 2010). For the demonstration of the carbohydrate-binding dependence of lectin-mediated toxicity, three different approaches were used: First, the three bioassays were carried out with an E. coli strain expressing the carbohydrate-binding defective CGL2 variant, CGL2(W72G) (Walser et al. 2004). Second, in the case of the C. elegans assays, bre-1(ye4) and ger-1 (op449) mutant worms, impaired in the fucose biosynthesis, were tested for resistance towards AAL-mediated toxicity. Third, in the case of A. aegypti, 50 mM of lactose and fucose were mixed to the bacterial solution, as competing ligands for binding of CGL2 and AAL, respectively. For the dose-dependent toxicity of CGL2 towards A. aegypti, CGL2-expressing E. coli were mixed with bacteria harbouring the empty expression vector to different fractions of the final suspension. In the case of C. elegans, CGL2-expressing E. coli cells were mixed with bacteria expressing the non-toxic CGL2(W72G) variant.
Food choice assay of C. elegans
Two circular lawns of E. coli BL21 (DE3) were prepared on 10-cm NGM plates containing 1 mM IPTG and 50 lg ⁄ mL Kanamycin. One of the lawns contained a mixture of E. coli expressing toxic wild-type CGL2 and nontoxic mutant CGL2(W72G) in a specific ratio. The other lawn consisted solely of CGL2(W72G)-expressing E. coli. The plates were incubated overnight at room temperature for the induction of the lectins. Food choice was examined by placing 30–50 young adult N2 nematodes in between the two lawns and determining the fraction of worms on each lawn after an incubation period of 8 h.
Statistical analysis
The statistical significance of the toxicity assays was evaluated by pairwise comparisons, using the non-
parametric Kolmogorov–Smirnov test in the case of C. elegans and A. aegypti and the parametric T-student test for A. castellanii. Comparisons of the response variables (development, survival and clearing area) were made between each lectin and the vector control for every experiment. For the demonstration of the carbohydrate-binding dependence of toxicity, pairwise comparisons between mutants and wild type or between treatments with or without the addition of carbohydrates were made. For the dose-dependent survival of mosquito larvae overtime, a Cox regression was performed, using days of feeding as time variable, mortality of larvae as status, and concentration of CGL2 (as percentage of E. coli) as covariate.
For the evaluation of the dose dependence and food choice of C. elegans, Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance and one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett post hoc comparisons were performed to test for significant differences in larval development and feeding behaviour in dependence of the fraction of CGL2-expressing E. coli.
The detailed results of the various statistical tests can be found in Appendix S6 (Supporting information).
Challenge of fungal mycelium with A. avenae
Coprinopsis cinerea mycelium was inoculated on petri dishes containing either 10% PDA [0.04% (w ⁄ v) potato extract, 0.2% dextrose, 1.5% agar] or YMG medium [0.4% (w ⁄ v) yeast extract, 1% (w ⁄ v) malt extract, 0.4% (w ⁄ v) 1.5% agar] overlaid with sterile cellophane disks. Mycelium was grown at 37 °C in the dark, until the plate was almost covered, before the addition of the nematodes. The nematode A. avenae was cultivated as described earlier. The worms were washed-off from highly densely populated plates with sterile water and transferred to 1.5% agar plates devoid of fungal mycelium and containing 200lg⁄mL Geneticin (G418) and 50 lg ⁄ mL Kanamycin, where they were kept at 23 °C for 3 days for sterilization and starvation. Subsequently, approximately 300 nematodes were transferred to the plates containing pre-grown C. cinerea mycelium and incubated for 3 days in the dark. After 2–3 days, the mycelium-nematode co-culture was collected and freeze-dried. As controls, mycelium without worms and mycelia challenged with approximately the same number of heat-killed (70 °C for 5 min) A. avenae or C. elegans, or live C. elegans were collected in the same way. As a control for physical damage, mycelium was cut extensively with a razor blade and incubated at 23 °C in the dark for 3 days before collecting. Mycelia of at least three plates per treatment were pooled to collect sufficient biomass for protein and RNA extraction and subsequent analysis of gene expression.
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
FUNGAL RESISTANCE LECTINS 3059

3060 S. BLEULER-MART ́INEZ ET AL. Immunoblotting
Analysis of fungal lectin expression by immunoblotting was performed as follows: The freeze-dried fungal material was homogenized with glass beads in a FastPrep instrument (Savant), first in dry state, and then in the presence of extraction buffer (500 lL of 1 volume of 1xPBS, 1 volume of water and 1 mM PMSF, per 30 mg of dry tissue). The samples were centrifuged at high speed (16 100 g), and the supernatants containing the soluble proteins were collected. Latter fractions were separated on 12% SDS-PAGE and analysed by immu-
Results
Expression of fruiting body lectins in E. coli
For the subsequent biotoxicity analysis, we selected a panel of seven previously characterized fruiting body lectins, covering a wide spectrum of fungal species, protein folds and carbohydrate specificities (Table 1). To obtain comparable results in a well-defined system and to retain the subcellular localization of the proteins during predation, the fungal lectins were expressed in the cytoplasm of Escherichia coli and the recombinant bacteria were fed to omnivorous and bacterivorous model organisms (Kunzler et al. 2010). The lectin-encoding cDNAs were all cloned into pET-based expression vectors under the control of an IPTG-inducible T7-promoter and expressed in E. coli at 23 °C as some fungal lectins showed decreased solubility at higher temperatures. The expression level and the solubility of the fungal lectins in E. coli were assessed as described (Kunzler et al. 2010). The selected fungal lectins were all expressed at similarly high levels and in a completely soluble form, except for CNL that was only partially soluble under these conditions (Fig. 1; Fig. S2, Supporting information).
Carbohydrate specificity of TAP1 from Sordaria macrospora and XCL from Xerocomus chrysenteron
TAP1 from the ascomycete Sordaria macrospora has been identified as a fruiting body (perithecium)-specific protein and has been classified as lectin based on its sequence similarity to the XCL, and other representatives of this lectin family (Nowrousian & Cebula 2005). On the other hand, the interaction of XCL with glycans
noblotting with rabbit serum against CGL1 ⁄ 2. amount loaded per sample was 15–20 lg of protein.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT–PCR)
The
RNA was extracted from 30 to 50 mg of freeze-dried fungal material using the RNeasyÒ Lipid Tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen). Isolated RNA was DNase-treated using the Qiagen RNase-Free DNase Set (Qiagen). Integrity of RNA was evaluated by agarose gel electrophoresis (1.2%) under denaturing conditions. For cDNA synthesis, 5 lg RNA was combined with 2 lL of oligodTprimer (100 lM) in a volume of 30 lL, and incubated for 10 min at 70 °C. The sample was cooled on ice for 10 min. Reverse transcription was carried out with M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase RNase H Minus (Promega), 1x reaction buffer provided with the enzyme, and dNTPs (10 mM each), and 1 lL of RibolockÔ (Fermentas), in a total final volume of 60 lL. The reaction mixture was incubated at 25°C for 10min, 40°C for 120min and at 70°C for 10min. RNA was hydrolysed at 65 °C for 15 min after the addition of 20 lL of 1 M NaOH. For neutralization, 20 lL of 1 M HCl was added. cDNA was purified with the NucleoSpin Extract Kit II (Macherey-Nagel) following manufacturer’s recommendations. Real-time PCR was performed in a thermocycler Rotor-gene 3000 (Corbett Research) with SensiMixÔPlusSYBR Kit (Quantace) in a volume of 20 lL. Each reaction was carried out at least in triplicates. b-Tubulin was used as internal control template. Primers for amplification of CGL1, CGL2 and b-tubulin (Table S5, Supporting information) were used at a final concentration of 900 nM. PCR conditions were 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 15s, 58°C for 30s and 72 °C for 30 s. Amplicon size and specificity for each primer pair were verified by agarose gel electrophoresis, melting curve analysis and sequencing. Relative expression ratio of each gene was calculated as described (Schefe et al. 2006). Standard errors of the mean are based on 3 to 4 technical replicates of each cDNA template and gene.
MW VC CGL2 CGL3 CNL XCL AAL TAP1 SSA kDa
75 50 37
25 20
15 10
Fig. 1 Solubility of fungal lectins expressed in Escherichia coli. Soluble protein extracts from lectin-expressing E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Molecular weight standard proteins (MW) and a control sample prepared from empty vector-containing bacteria (VC) are indicated.
         Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

has been characterized, but no glycan array analysis of its carbohydrate-binding specificity was available so far (Birck et al. 2004; Damian et al. 2005). To demonstrate carbohydrate binding and to determine the specificity of TAP1 in comparison with lectin XCL, we expressed His-tagged forms of both lectins in E. coli and purified the recombinant proteins by metal affinity chromatography (Method S1, Supporting information). The fluorescently labelled proteins were used to probe a glycan array offered by the Consortium of Functional Glycomics (CFG). The results show that TAP1 is indeed a lectin and that it binds specifically to glycans containing the Galb1-3GalNAc epitope (or T-antigen) (Fig. S3, Table S7, Supporting information). This specificity was also found for homologous lectins from other fungi e.g., Agaricus bisporus lectin (ABL) and Sclerotium rolfsii lectin (SRL) (Wu et al. 2001; Carrizo et al. 2005). In contrast to some representatives of this family, which harbour a second carbohydrate-binding site specific for terminal GlcNAc (Carrizo et al. 2005; Leonidas et al. 2007), no significant binding of TAP1 to glycans of the array carrying this epitope was observed. This is in agreement with the conservation of all residues involved in GlcNAc binding in ABL and XCL, but just one of five in the case of TAP1 (Nakamura-Tsuruta et al. 2006). On the other hand, the results from the glycan array confirmed that XCL is a lectin with dual specificity, able to bind T-antigen containing epitopes on one binding site and terminal GlcNAc residues on the second binding site (Fig. S4, Table S8, Supporting information).
Toxicity of recombinant fruiting body lectins towards Caenorhabditis elegans, Aedes aegypti and Acanthamoeba castellanii
To cover a wide range of invertebrates, we established biotoxicity assays with three model organisms representing the phyla nematoda (C. elegans), arthropoda (A. aegypti) and amoebozoa (A. castellanii). Because each of these phyla harbours fungivorous representatives, the biotoxicity results obtained with these model organisms are likely to be relevant with regard to ecologically relevant predators and parasites of fungi. As outlined earlier, all assays were based on the feeding of lectin-expressing E. coli cells. In the case of the omnivorous filter-feeding larvae of the mosquito A. aegypti, the E. coli cells were suspended in water. In case of the other two test organisms, C. elegans, a soil-dwelling bacterivorous nematode and A. castellanii, a ubiquitous omnivorous amoeba, the E. coli cells were offered as a lawn on an agar surface. Toxicity was scored based on larval survival (A. aegypti), larval development (C. elegans) or clearing area on the bacterial lawn (A. castellanii) as described (Kunzler et al. 2010). The results of the
FUNGAL RESISTANCE LECTINS 3061
  1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
10 8 6 4 2 0
30 25 20 15 10
5 0
VC CGL2 CGL3 CNL XCL AAL TAP1 SSA
                           VC CGL2 CGL3 CNL XCL AAL TAP1 SSA
                 VC CGL2 CGL3 CNL XCL AAL TAP1 SSA
Fig. 2 Toxicity of recombinant fruiting body lectins towards three different model organisms. Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) cells expressing the respective fungal lectins were fed to Caenorhabditis elegans (a), Aedes aegypti (b) and Acanthamoeba castellanii (c). (a) Fraction of C. elegans L1 larvae developing to L4 stage within 72 h of feeding on a lawn of respective E. coli BL21 cells. (b) Number of A. aegypti L2 larvae surviving after 96 h feeding on a suspension of respective E. coli BL21 cells. (c) Growth of A. castellanii measured as cleared area of on a lawn of respective E. coli BL21 cells after 6 days. Empty vector-containing BL21 (DE3) (VC) was used as control. The VC bar represents data from three different biological replicates with no significant differences amongst them (P > 0.05). Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
   (a)
C. elegans
             (b)
A. aegypti
             (c) A. castellanii
             Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Clearing area on bacterial lawn (cm2)
Survival of L2 instar larvae after 96 h
Fraction of worms developed to L4

3062 S. BLEULER-MART ́INEZ ET AL.
Table 2 Summary of the results of the biotoxicity assays
of these E. coli cells resulted in decreased toxicity, suggesting that these proteins have to be in their native conformation to confer toxicity (Kunzler et al. 2010). To demonstrate that the toxicity of the lectins is depending on the carbohydrate binding, we used three different approaches: testing of lectin variants with impaired carbohydrate binding, testing of mutant organisms lacking the recognized glycan epitope and competition of the binding by the addition of soluble carbohydrate ligand (Fig. 3). For reasons of availability of respective reagents, these control experiments were performed only with CGL2 and AAL. However, because these two lectins have different protein folds and carbohydrate specificities, the obtained results are likely to be representative for the other lectins.
The CGL2 variant, CGL2(W72G), carries a single amino acid substitution at residue 72 that retains the overall structure of the lectin but abolishes carbohydrate binding (Walser et al. 2004). In contrast to CGL2, which was highly toxic towards C. elegans, A. aegypti and A. castellanii with respect to the control (P < 0.05), CGL2(W72G) was not toxic to any of these organisms (P > 0.05) (Fig. 3a). The addition of 50 mM of the carbohydrate ligands lactose and L-fucose to the bacterial suspension completely prevented the toxicity of CGL2 and AAL (P > 0.05 with respect to the control), respectively, towards A. aegypti. As expected, L-fucose had no effect on the toxicity of CGL2 (P > 0.05), but surprisingly, lactose partially prevented the toxicity of AAL against A. aegypti larvae (P < 0.05) (Fig. 3b). The use of mutants defective in the biosynthesis of the epitopes recognized by CGL2 and AAL in C. elegans confirmed above results. In contrast to the wild-type N2 worms, bre-1 and ger-1 mutant worms, which are defective in the biosynthesis of fucose, are completely resistant towards AAL (P < 0.01) (Fig. 3c). The resistance of these worms towards CGL2 is based on the specific recognition of a fucose-containing b-galactoside on the core of asparagine-bound glycans in C. elegans by CGL2 (Titz et al. 2009; Butschi et al. 2010). All these results demonstrate that the toxicity mediated by CGL2 and AAL, and most likely also by the other fruiting body lectins, depends on the recognition of specific glycoconjugates in the target organisms.
Dose dependence of CGL2-mediated toxicity
One of the characteristic features of toxic effects is their dose dependence. Previously, we demonstrated the dose-dependent toxicity of CGL2 towards C. elegans by adding different amounts of purified CGL2 to liquid cultures of the nematode (Butschi et al. 2010). Here, we tested the dose-dependent toxicity of CGL2 towards A. aegypti and C. elegans using mixtures of E. coli cells
 Caenorhabditis Lectin elegans
CGL2 Toxic
CGL3 Non-toxic
CNL Non-toxic* XCL Toxic AAL Toxic TAP1 Toxic
SSA Non-toxic
Aedes aegypti
Toxic Non-toxic Toxic Toxic Toxic Toxic Toxic
Acanthamoeba castellanii
Toxic Non-toxic Toxic Non-toxic Toxic Toxic Toxic
  *CNL was not significantly toxic against C. elegans N2 larvae but against the hypersensitive C. elegans pmk-1 mutant (data no shown). CGL2, Coprinopsis cinerea galectin 2; CGL3, Coprinopsis cinerea galectin-related 3; CNL, Clitocybe nebularis lectin; XCL, Xerocomus chrysenteron lectin; AAL, Aleuria aurantia lectin; TAP1, transcript associated with perithecial development (Sordaria macrospora lectin); SSA, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum agglutinin.
bioassays are shown in Fig. 2 and summarized in Table 2. Except for CGL3 that was not toxic to any of the three organisms (P > 0.05 with respect to vector control), all fungal lectins were toxic for at least two of the organisms. CGL2, AAL and TAP1 exhibited toxicity towards all three test organisms. CGL1, the isolectin of CGL2, was also tested and showed similar toxicity values towards the three organisms as CGL2 (data not shown). The toxicity of CGL1 and CGL2 towards C. elegans has been reported previously (Titz et al. 2009; Butschi et al. 2010). XCL, AAL, TAP1, CGL1 and CGL2 were significantly toxic for C. elegans (P < 0.01), impairing the development of more than 80% of the larvae (Fig. 2a). CNL did not affect the development of wildtype N2 worms (P > 0.05) but was toxic when tested towards worms carrying the pmk-1 mutation (data not shown). These worms are defective in the p38 MAPK pathway and hypersensitive towards a variety of stresses including CGL2-mediated toxicity (Butschi et al. 2010). In the case of A. aegypti, CGL1, CGL2, XCL and AAL were highly toxic, having a lethal effect on more than 80% of the larvae (P < 0.05). For TAP1 and SSA, the mortality was not so pronounced but the development was significantly different from the control (P < 0.05) (Fig. 2b). In the case of A. castellanii, except for CGL3 and XCL (P > 0.05), all lectins were toxic resulting in a clearing zone significantly different from the one in the control (P < 0.01) (Fig. 2c).
Carbohydrate-binding dependence of CGL2and AALmediated toxicity
Expression of XCL at 37 °C resulted in a similar level of expression but decreased degree of solubility. Feeding
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

containing varying fractions of CGL2-expressing E. coli in the standard assays (Kunzler et al. 2010). Both assays showed a dose-dependent CGL2-mediated toxicity (Fig. 4). In the case of A. aegypti, the survival of the larvae decreased proportionally to increasing amounts of CGL2-expressing E. coli in the bacterial suspension (P < 0.01) (Fig. 4a). The dose-dependent toxicity was significant already after the second day of exposure at a fraction of 16% of CGL2-expressing E. coli, where the larval survival dropped below 50%. In the case of C. elegans, the dose-dependent toxicity was determined
in terms of larval development and food choice (Fig. 4b). Development of C. elegans larvae was scored as described earlier using E. coli lawns composed of cells expressing toxic CGL2 and non-toxic CGL2(W72G) in different ratios. For the food choice assay, larvae were placed in the center of two circular E. coli lawns, and the relative distribution of the larvae between the two lawns was assessed after 8 h. One lawn contained a mixture of E. coli expressing CGL2 and E. coli expressing CGL2(W72G) in different ratios. The other lawn consisted of CGL2(W72G) expressing E. coli only.
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
FUNGAL RESISTANCE LECTINS 3063
      1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
10 8 6 4
10 (b)
8 6 4 2 0
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4
A. aegypti
                                                                                                                                              VC
CGL2 CGL2(W72G)
VC CGL2 AAL
        (c)
C. elegans
      (a2)
A. aegypti
            2 0.2
    0
16 14 12 10
8 6 4 2 0
VC
CGL2 CGL2(W72G)
0.0
         (a3)
A. castellanii
                 VC
CGL2 CGL2(W72G)
Fig. 3 Carbohydrate-binding-dependent toxicity of CGL2 and AAL towards the three model organisms. (a) Comparison of toxicity between Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) expressing either wild-type CGL2 or the carbohydrate-binding defective mutant CGL2(W72G) against Caenorhabditis elegans (a1), Aedes aegypti (a2) and Acanthamoeba castellanii. (a3). Empty vector-containing BL21 (DE3) (VC) was used as control. (b) Specific inhibition of insecticidal activity of lectins CGL2 and AAL by free carbohydrate ligands. Survival of A. aegypti larvae after 96 h feeding on vector control-containing (VC), CGL2(lactose-binding)and AAL(fucose-binding)-expressing E. coli BL21 (DE3), with and without the addition of free carbohydrates: No fill = no carbohydrate, diagonal lines = 50 mM lactose, dots = 50 mM L-fucose. (c) Resistance of C. elegans fucose-deficient mutants to AAL-mediated toxicity. Development of L1 to L4 larvae of wild-type N2, as well as bre-1 and ger-1 mutant worms defective in fucose biosynthesis on AAL-expressing BL21 (DE3). Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
   (a1)
C. elegans
    N2
bre-1 (ye4)
ger-1 (op499)
Clearing area on bacterial lawn (cm2) Survival of L2 instar larvae after 96 h Fraction of worms developed to L4
Fraction of worms developed to L4 Survival of L2 instar larvae after 96 h

3064 S. BLEULER-MART ́INEZ ET AL.
 (a)
10
8
6
4
2
0
(b1)
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
(b2)
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
% of CGL2 (wildtype)-expressing E. coli in mixed lawn
Fig. 4 Dose dependence of CGL2-mediated toxicity towards Aedes aegypti and Caenorhabditis elegans. (a) Survival of A. aegypti L2 larvae after 96 h of feeding on bacterial suspensions containing increasing fractions of CGL2-expressing vs. empty vector-containing Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). (b) Development (b1) and food choice (b2) of C. elegans L1 larvae on bacterial lawns containing increasing fractions of CGL2-expressing vs. CGL2(W72G)-expressing E. coli BL21 (DE3). Values on the X axis indicate the fraction of CGL2-expressing bacteria in the bacterial population (see Materials and methods). Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
           Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
   C. elegans
                         0 10 25 30 40 50 75 100
% of CGL2-expressing E. coli in lawn
     C. elegans
                           0 10 20 30 40 50 100
   A. aegypti
                2% CGL2 4% CGL2 8% CGL2 16% CGL2
         Both assays showed a strong effect of the CGL2expressing E. coli. Whereas more than 90% of the larvae developed normally at a fraction of 10% of CGL2expressing E. coli, not significantly differing from the 0% control (P > 0.05); less than half of the worms did
develop properly at a fraction of just 25% of CGL2expressing E. coli (P < 0.05) (Fig. 4, panel B1). At fractions higher than 25% of CGL2-expressing E. coli, the proportion of fully developed larvae decreased gradually to approximately 10% for a purely CGL2-expressing E. coli lawn. In contrast, in the food choice assay, 10% of CGL2-expressing E. coli in the mixed lawn were sufficient to reduce the fraction of larvae found on this lawn to approximately 20% of all larvae (P < 0.05 with respect to the 0% control), and this number did not change significantly upon further increase in the fraction of CGL2-expressing E. coli in this lawn (Fig. 4, panel B2).
Semi-quantitative comparisons of the relative (to whole protein content) CGL2 levels in soluble protein extracts derived from C. cinerea young fruiting bodies and from an induced culture of CGL2-expressing E. coli suggest that the levels in the fungal extract are about 10-fold lower than in the bacterial extract (data not shown). These results suggest that the CGL2 level in a bacterial lawn containing 10% of CGL2-expressing E. coli is comparable to the one in C. cinerea fruiting bodies. In conclusion, the effects of fungal lectins on animal larval development and food choice are clearly dose-dependent, and animal food choice is affected at concentrations of the lectins similar to those in the fungal fruiting bodies.
Induction of CGL1 and CGL2 in C. cinerea vegetative mycelium upon predation by A. avenae
Both galectins from C. cinerea (CGL1 and CGL2) were reported to be specifically expressed during sexual reproduction in fruiting bodies and to be absent from vegetatively growing mycelium of C. cinerea (Boulianne et al. 2000). The expression of plant lectins directed against herbivores was shown to be inducible upon herbivory in addition to their constitutive developmental regulation (Peumans & Van Damme 1995a; Subramanyam et al. 2008). Accordingly, it was tested whether nematotoxic CGL1 and CGL2 were also induced upon fungivory. For this purpose, we established laboratory cultures of the fungivorous nematode, Aphelenchus avenae (Bastian, 1865), on different filamentous fungi. Upon feeding of A. avenae on the filamentous ascomycete Ashbya gossypii expressing cytoplasmic GFP under the control of the constitutive TEF promoter (Dunkler & Wendland 2007), we observed a bright fluorescence in the intestine of some animals (Fig. 5), suggesting that this nematode feeds on the content of fungal hyphae as described (Fisher & Evans 1967). To check for the induction of lectin-encoding genes, we challenged the vegetative mycelium of monokaryotic and dikaryotic strains of C. cinerea with starved nema-
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Fraction of worms on lawn of
CGL2(W72G)-expressing E.coli Fraction of worms developed to L4 Survival of L2 instar larvae

todes and let them feed on the mycelium for 3 days. The expression of the CGL1and CGL2-encoding genes in C. cinerea under these conditions was analysed on protein level by immunoblotting with specific antibodies and validated quantitatively on transcript levels by qRT–PCR (Fig. 6). Unchallenged mycelium, mycelium challenged with heat-killed A. avenae, mycelium challenged with live and heat-killed C. elegans, physically damaged mycelium and young fruiting bodies were used as controls. On protein level, bands corresponding to CGL1 ⁄ 2 were observed in the mycelium challenged with A. avenae on both, a monokaryotic and a dikaryot-
ic strain (Fig. 6). This expression was specific for the mycelium exposed to predation as no induction was observed upon exposure to C. elegans or dead A. avenae (Fig. 6a) or upon physical damage (Fig. 6b). To exclude that these signals were derived from nematode galectins, we extracted proteins from a co-culture of Fusarium oxysporum (which does not contain any galectins) and A. avenae and probed the extracts with antiCGL1 ⁄ 2 antisera which did not result in any specific signals (data not shown). The predation-specific induction of CGL1 ⁄ 2 was confirmed and quantified on transcript level. The expression level of both genes was,
FUNGAL RESISTANCE LECTINS 3065
   (a) (b)
Fig. 5 Co-cultures of the fungivorous nematode Aphelenchus avenae with the model filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii. (a) Light microscopy of A. avenae feeding on A. gossypii mycelium. (b) Fluorescence microscopy of A. avenae fed on A. gossypii strain ADA8, expressing GFP in the cytoplasm.
   (a) 400 300
             CGL2 CGL1
(b)
200 100 0
800 600
CGL1 CGL2
                  CGL2
CGL1 400
200 0
            Fig. 6 Induction of cgl1 and cgl2 in the vegetative mycelium of Coprinopsis cinerea upon predation by the fungivorous nematode Aphelenchus avenae on protein and transcript level. (a) Induction in C. cinerea strain AmutBmut. Left panel: Soluble protein extracts from vegetative mycelium of C. cinerea strain AmutBmut grown in 10% PDA in the absence (Cc) or presence (Cc + Aa) of the fungivorous nematode A. avenae were separated by SDS-PAGE and analysed by immunoblotting using anti-CGL1 ⁄ 2 polyclonal antiserum. Mycelium of C. cinerea in the presence of live (Cc + Ce) or dead [Cc + Ce (†)] Caenorhabditis elegans, dead A. avenae [Cc + Aa (†)] and young fruiting bodies of C. cinerea (Cc Fb) were included as additional controls for cgl1 ⁄ 2 expression. Right panel: qRT–PCR analysis showing the relative expression ratio of cgl1 and cgl2 relative to the b-tubulin-encoding gene in vegetative mycelium of C. cinerea strain AmutBmut grown on 10% PDA and challenged with A. avenae with respect to an unchallenged control. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean of three technical replicates. (b) Induction in C. cinerea strain Okayama 7. Left panel: Immunoblot comparing the induction of cgl1 and cgl2 in mycelium of the monokaryotic C. cinerea strain Okayama 7 grown on YMG, in the presence (Cc + Aa) or absence (Cc) of A. avenae, and upon physical damage (PD). C. cinerea fruiting body extract (Cc Fb) was included as control. Right panel: qRT–PCR analysis showing the expression ratio of cgl1 and cgl2 relative to the b-tubulin-encoding gene in vegetative mycelium of C. cinerea strain Okayama 7 grown on YMG upon challenge with A. avenae (no fill) or physical damage (diagonal lines), with respect to an unchallenged control. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean of four technical replicates.
CGL1 CGL2
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Relative expression ratio
Relative expression ratio

3066 S. BLEULER-MART ́INEZ ET AL.
depending on the strain and medium used, between 3and 9-fold higher than in non-challenged mycelium, but much lower than in fruiting bodies (data not shown). The induction of CGL1 ⁄ 2 in the monokaryotic strain Okayama 7 (Fig. 6b) suggests that the induction of the galectins by feeding is independent of sexual development, as this strain is not able to form fruiting bodies.
Discussion
Previous studies suggested a role of individual fruiting body lectins as effector molecules in the resistance of fungi against predators and parasites (Trigueros et al. 2003; Hamshou et al. 2009; Butschi et al. 2010). In this study, we present data that suggest that this function is a general feature of this group of fungal lectins and that these proteins may be a molecular handle to investigate the largely unexplored field of fungal defence.
As mentioned in the introduction, a common and striking feature of all identified fruiting body lectins is their cytoplasmic localization, although it cannot be excluded that a portion of these proteins is secreted by means of a non-conventional pathway. This subcellular localization is difficult to reconcile with an endogenous function of these lectins in morphogenesis or development by interaction with host glycans as all characterized types of glycosylation in fungi are localized in the extracellular space (Varki et al. 2009). CGL2 from Coprinopsis cinerea and SRL from Sclerotium rolfsii were suggested to bind to endogenous glycosphingolipids (Walser et al. 2003; Swamy et al. 2004). However, neither could the recognized glycosphingolipids thus far be identified, nor could the glycan dependence of the binding be demonstrated.
In contrast to an endogenous function, the cytoplasmic localization of fruiting body lectins is ideally suited for the proposed role of these proteins in the defence of fungi against predators, such as fungivorous nematodes. These organisms use a stylet to pierce the cell wall and the plasma membrane of fungal hyphae and suck the cellular content (Fisher & Evans 1967). This mode of predation leads to a direct contact of the cytoplasmic toxins with the digestive tract of the animal. Our experimental system, where omnivorous or bacterivorous organisms feed on Escherichia coli cells whose cytoplasm contains high levels of the fungal lectins, retains this mode of toxin exposure. Upon ingestion, the bacteria are lysed, and the cytoplasmic lectins are released and can bind to specific glycans in the digestive tract of the predator. Previous studies have demonstrated the carbohydrate-binding dependence of the toxicity (Trigueros et al. 2003; Butschi et al. 2010) or antitumour activity (Pohleven et al. 2009; Yang et al. 2009)
mediated by fungal lectins. Consistent with these results, we show here that specific carbohydrate binding of the fungal lectins is absolutely essential for their toxicity. Accordingly, the availability of ligands in the digestive tract will determine the toxicity profile of a given lectin with regard to the target organisms. Along these lines, the difference in the toxicity profile of the homologous lectins XCL and TAP1 may be explained by their difference in carbohydrate-binding specificity as determined by glycan array analysis. Based on the observed toxicity profiles of the examined fruiting body lectins and their carbohydrate-binding specificity, we can only speculate about the glycan repertoire of the examined model organisms. It is known, for example, that glycans of insects, nematodes and amoebae are rich in terminal fucose residues which fits to the observed broad toxicity of AAL (Ma et al. 2006; Paschinger et al. 2008). We have recently identified the target glycan of CGL2 in Caenorhabditis elegans which appears to be present in some invertebrates but absent from mammals and fungi (Titz et al. 2009; Butschi et al. 2010). The specificity of fruiting body lectins for animal and amoebozoan glycans (rather than fungal glycans) is a strong argument for a role of these proteins in defence and points to an antagonistic relationship between these organisms that has evolved on the basis of lectin–glycan interaction.
The effects of fungal secondary metabolites against predators include growth retardation, decrease in the size of pupae and adults, reduced fecundity, repellency and even genetic changes. To avoid these effects, animals adapt by changing their feeding and oviposition preferences (Wicklow 1988) or inactivation of the toxins (Niu et al. 2008). In our biotoxicity tests with recombinant proteins, we observed clear effects on the viability, the propagation and the development of the test organisms. However, in these tests, the amount of lectin, to which the organisms were exposed, was probably one order of magnitude higher than the levels to which fungal predators are exposed in nature. We estimated that CGL2 accounts for approximately 2% of the soluble protein content of young fruiting bodies, whereas it accounts for approximately 20% of the soluble protein content of the CGL2-expressing bacteria (data not shown). On the other hand, the results of our food choice experiments (Fig. 4, panel b2) suggest that low levels of lectins can already have a strong effect on C. elegans behaviour. It may be speculated that in soil ecosystems, such lectins have not necessarily evolved to kill predators but might act as repellents by influencing the grazing preferences of fungivores. This may explain why in laboratory co-cultures, Aphelenchus avenae and other fungivorous nematodes are able to feed and propagate on C. cinerea and other filamentous
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

fungi known to produce lectins and other toxic molecules.
A hallmark of the group of fungal lectins examined in this study is their exclusive and abundant expression in the fruiting bodies or sclerotia of the respective organism. It has been proposed that mycotoxins in fungi are distributed in the organs in proportion to the risk of being attacked (Wicklow 1988). Fruiting bodies and sclerotia may require special protection against predators to ensure the reproduction of the fungus. Protection of vegetative mycelium, on the other hand, might not be so critical because of the capability of rapid regeneration and the modular design of fungal organisms. However, the impact of grazing by fungivores can be so severe that it leads to reduced fitness of the fungi in terms of growth and biomass, possibly influencing the community structure in nature (McGonigle 2007; Rohlfs et al. 2007). A recent study shows that toxic metabolites on the hyphal surface of some fungi cause repellence of the hyphal-feeder Folsomia candida (Bollmann et al. 2010). In the view of these reports, the observed predation-triggered induction of fungal lectins in the mycelium is in line with the synthesis of other, better characterized fungal defence molecules, such as secondary metabolites or cyclic peptides, which are expressed either constitutively or upon wound-activation (Spiteller 2008). The specificity of this induction, however, still remains to be elucidated. In plants, defence lectins were shown to be induced not only by herbivory but also by other stress conditions (Peumans & Van Damme 1995a; Babosha 2008; Lannoo & Van Damme 2010), and Galectin-1 has been recently proposed as a marker for stress in animals (Iwamoto et al. 2010). Similarly, in C. cinerea, the expression of CGL1 and CGL2 in the vegetative mycelium is not only induced by nematode predation but also by nutrient limitation (Bottoli 2001). On the other hand, we did not observe any induction of cgl1 or cgl2 when we challenged the mycelium of C. cinerea with different bacteria, other fungi or cell wall-degrading enzymes (data not shown). Taken together, these results indicate that fungi are able to regulate the synthesis of lectins in response to specific environmental signals including predation.
In conclusion, we propose, based on the results of this study, a general role of cytoplasmic fruiting body lectins in the resistance of fungi against predators and parasites. The inducibility of these proteins by fungivory, along with their specificity for non-fungal glycans, suggests that this type of resistance has evolved as a defence system of fungi against these antagonistic organisms (Rohlfs & Churchill 2011). In agreement with this hypothesis, a phylogenetic survey of available fungal genomes suggests that homologues of the
lectins investigated in this study are absent from fungi with biotopes that shelter them from predators, such as endophytes and obligate plant parasites (Table S9, Supporting information). Further experiments examining the effect of these proteins on both animal ⁄ amoebozoan and fungal fitness in ecologically more relevant scenarios, e.g. the established co-cultures of fungi and fungivorous nematodes, will be necessary to confirm this hypothesis. Such a defence system would be analogous to plants, where lectins and other protein molecules such as protease inhibitors, complement the chemical defence fulfilled by toxic secondary metabolites. Recent studies suggest that even some human galectins and C-type lectins play an important role as effector molecules in the defence of epithelia against microbial pathogens (Cash et al. 2006; Kohatsu et al. 2006; Stowell et al. 2010). Similar to the effects of the fruiting body lectins, the antimicrobial effect of these defence lectins depends on binding of specific carbohydrate epitopes on the surface of these microbes. These examples suggest that lectin-mediated defence is an ancient form of defence that is conserved across all kingdoms including animals, plants and fungi. Studies of this type of defence may open new avenues for the management of pests and parasites. Additionally, this study emphasizes the potential of studying specific lectin–carbohydrate interactions as a molecular tool to understand interspecific trophic and evolutionary relationships in nature.
Acknowledgements
We thank W. Rudin and P. Mu ̈ller (Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland) for constant supply of A. aegypti eggs and J. Wendland (Carlsberg Laboratory, Copenhagen, Denmark) for providing Ashbya gossypii strains. We also acknowledge L. Paquereau (IPBS-UMR, Toulouse, France), J. Olausson (Linko ̈ping University, Sweden) and M. Nowrousian (Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany) for providing XCL-, AALand TAP1-encoding plasmids, respectively, and Els van Damme (Ghent University, Belgium) for providing the Sclerotinia sclerotiorum strain and for interesting discussions. Sonja Ka ̈ser and Yannick Duport provided excellent technical support. The glycan array analysis was conducted by Core H of the CFG. This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant no. 31003A-116827 to M. K., M. O. H. and M. A.), the European Commission’s Marie Curie programme (EuroGlycoArrays ITN) and ETH Zu ̈ rich.
References
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
FUNGAL RESISTANCE LECTINS 3067

3070 S. BLEULER-MART ́INEZ ET AL.
 The common research topic in the laboratory of M.A. is microbial glycobiology. M.K. leads a small subgroup in this laboratory whose research focuses on the role of glycans and glycanbinding proteins (lectins) in the interaction of fungi with predators and parasites. The subgroup collaborates with J.S. and J.P. on the isolation and characterization of novel lectins and protease inhibitors from mushrooms, and with the laboratory of M.O.H. on the genetic analysis of the nematotoxicity of some fungal lectins in the model nematode C. elegans.
Data Accessibility
Data deposited at Dryad: doi: 10.5061/dryad.8754.
Supporting information
Additional Supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
Method S1 Purification and fluorescent labeling of TAP1 and XCL for glycan array analysis.
Fig. S2 Whole cell extract prepared from lectin-expressing E. coli BL21(DE3) separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue.
Fig. S3 Carbohydrate-binding specificity of TAP1 from S. macrospora.
Fig. S4 Carbohydrate-binding specificity of XCL from X. chrysenteron.
Table S5 Oligonucleotides used.
Data S6 Results of the statistical tests.
Table S7 Raw data of glycan array analysis (V 4.0) performed with TAP1.
Table S8 Raw data of glycan array analysis (V 4.1) performed with TAP1.
Table S9 Phylogenetic distribution of lectins included in this study among different fungi of the phyla Basidiomycota, Ascomycota and Zygomycota with different ecology and available genome sequence (S, saprotrophic; M, mycorrhyzal; P, pathogen; E, endophyte, *Obligate parasite or symbiont).
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
 Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
