  Vol 439|23 February 2006|doi:10.1038/nature04336
LETTERS
Tunicates and not cephalochordates are the closest living relatives of vertebrates
Fre ́de ́ric Delsuc1†, Henner Brinkmann1, Daniel Chourrout2 & Herve ́ Philippe1
 Tunicates or urochordates (appendicularians, salps and sea squirts), cephalochordates (lancelets) and vertebrates (including lamprey and hagfish) constitute the three extant groups of chordate animals. Traditionally, cephalochordates are considered as the closest living relatives of vertebrates, with tunicates representing the earliest chordate lineage1,2. This view is mainly justified by overall morphological similarities and an apparently increased complexity in cephalochordates and vertebrates relative to tunicates2. Despite their critical importance for understanding the origins of vertebrates3, phylogenetic studies of chordate relationships have provided equivocal results4–7. Taking advantage of the genome sequencing of the appendicularian Oikopleura dioica, we assembled a phylogenomic data set of 146 nuclear genes (33,800 unambiguously aligned amino acids) from 14 deuterostomes and 24 other slowly evolving species as an outgroup. Here we show that phylogenetic analyses of this data set provide compelling evidence that tunicates, and not cephalochordates, represent the closest living relatives of vertebrates. Chordate monophyly remains uncertain because cephalochordates, albeit with a non-significant statistical support, surprisingly grouped with echinoderms, a hypothesis that needs to be tested with additional data. This new phylogenetic scheme prompts a reappraisal of both morphological and palaeontological data and has important implications for the interpretation of developmental and genomic studies in which tunicates and cephalochordates are used as model animals.
The introduction of molecular data into classical systematics has already tested several evolutionary hypotheses through the analysis of individual genes such as ribosomal RNA (rRNA). However, phylogenies reconstructed from a single gene or a small number of genes are hampered by stochastic effects limiting the statistical significance of the results. The genomic era is now providing the opportunity for phylogenetics to resolve a number of outstanding evolutionary questions through an increase of resolving power8. This applies to the origin and early evolution of vertebrates, a fundamental evolutionary question that has been revived by recent advances in molecular and developmental biology as well as new fossil discoveries3.
Our understanding of these events has to be considered in the context of chordate phylogeny, for which the traditional textbook view considers cephalochordates as the closest living relatives of vertebrates (a group named Euchordata), to the exclusion of the morphologically more distinct tunicates2. Although almost universally accepted, this classical picture is supported by only a limited number of morphological features that are far from being unambiguous. For example, the presence of metameric segmentation1 used to link cephalochordates and vertebrates might in fact be considered as an ancestral feature of deuterostomes9. The classical view (Euchordata) has also found some support in molecular studies
of rRNA genes5. However, a competing hypothesis grouping tunicates and vertebrates into a clade named Olfactores10 was recovered in cladistic analyses of combined rRNA and morphology4 and suggested by the structure of cadherin genes11. However, the statistical significance of these apparently conflicting results was limited by the relatively few characters considered.
Recently, two multigene studies based on nuclear proteins have provided some support for Olfactores6,7. However, the extremely limited chordate species sampling considered in these studies meant that no firm conclusions were possible, given the potentially deleterious effects of poor taxon sampling on phylogenetic inference8. We have therefore extended the 146-gene data set of ref. 7 from 4 to 13 chordates, including one cephalochordate, four tunicates, and eight vertebrates, with the notable inclusion of the early-branching agnaths (hagfish and lamprey). Within tunicates, the incorporation of O. dioica is particularly important because it belongs to appendicularians (or larvaceans), which are morphologically and molecularly very divergent from the ascidians previously included.
Phylogenetic analyses of this multigene data set using maximum parsimony (MP), maximum likelihood (ML) and bayesian inference all converged to the same topology (Fig. 1). The statistical support was maximal in bayesian analyses, where all nodes received a posterior probability of 1.0. All non-controversial groups (choanoflagellates, cnidarians, molluscs, arthropods, tunicates and vertebrates) were recovered with strong bootstrap support (bootstrap percentage BPMP–ML . 95%), as were also metazoans, bilaterians, protostomes and lophotrochozoans (Fig. 1). Weak statistical support (BPMP–ML , 72%) was only observed for some relationships within insects and bivalves. Within vertebrates, our results strongly support the controversial monophyly of cyclostomes (lamprey and hagfish)2. Also, both MP and ML provided reasonable support for the monophyly of deuterostomes (BPMP–ML 1⁄4 87–93%). However, within deuterostomes, chordates appeared not to be monophyletic, because cephalochordates grouped with echinoderms, albeit with moderate ML bootstrap support (BPMP–ML 1⁄4 97–89%). By contrast, whereas MP moderately supported the grouping of tunicates and vertebrates (90%), the more accurate ML method12 provided unambiguous bootstrap support (100%) for Olfactores (Fig. 1).
To test further the stability of phylogenetic relationships within deuterostomes, we evaluated in a likelihood framework the 15 rooted topologies corresponding to all possibilities of connecting the four major groups under study (echinoderms, cephalochordates, tunicates and vertebrates). Thirteen alternatives to the ML topology were significantly rejected at the 5% confidence level by all statistical tests (Table 1). Only the topology where chordates are monophyletic, with cephalochordates joining the tunicates plus vertebrate clade, was not rejected (Table 1). The traditional hypothesis of euchordate monophyly was ranked only fourth in terms of log-likelihood, after the
 1De ́partement de Biochimie, Centre Robert-Cedergren, Universite ́ de Montre ́al, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montre ́al, Que ́bec H3C3J7, Canada. 2Sars Centre for Marine Molecular Biology, Bergen High Technology Centre, University of Bergen, Thormøhlensgaten 55, 5008 Bergen, Norway. †Present address: Laboratoire de Pale ́ontologie, Phyloge ́nie et Pale ́obiologie, Institut des Sciences de l’Evolution, UMR 5554-CNRS, Universite ́ Montpellier II, France.
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group
965

 LETTERS
NATURE|Vol 439|23 February 2006
alternative in which cephalochordates emerge before echinoderms. These two topologies appeared significantly worse that the ML tree of Fig. 1, even for the conservative Shimodaira–Hasegawa test13.
Our results therefore indicate a strong phylogenetic affinity between tunicates and vertebrates to the exclusion of cephalochordates. However, obtaining high statistical support for a given topology does not necessarily indicate that the phylogenetic inference is correct. Indeed, the phylogenetic analysis of large-scale data sets requires particular attention to potential systematic biases associated, for instance, with differences in evolutionary rates among species, compositional biases and heterotachy8. In particular, a long-branch attraction (LBA) artefact14 may potentially occur since tunicates include fast (Ciona ssp.) and very fast (O. dioica) evolving species (Fig. 1). A high evolutionary rate of tunicate genes was already noticed in rRNA genes5 and in complete mitochondrial genomes15. Our results confirm these observations for a large number of nuclear genes. As fast evolutionary rates are also often associated with compositional bias or with heterotachy, it is a necessary first step to exclude the possibility that the observed grouping of tunicates with vertebrates results from a tree reconstruction artefact.
The most obvious potential artefact, an LBA, predicts that the fastevolving tunicates would be attracted towards the outgroup, and not by the slowly evolving vertebrates. This would produce a topology compatible with the classical hypothesis of chordate evolution where the slow-evolving cephalochordates and vertebrates group together. This prediction is perfectly congruent with the lower support for Olfactores observed with MP (90%), a method known to be more sensitive to LBA than probabilistic methods14. Indeed, when O. dioica
was used as the single representative of tunicates, MP unambiguously supported (BP 1⁄4 100) an aberrant position for this group which emerged before cnidarians, disrupting the monophyly of bilaterians (Supplementary Fig. S1). By contrast, the less sensitive ML method recovered Olfactores, albeit with decreased bootstrap support (BP 1⁄4 84) (Supplementary Fig. S2). Therefore, despite its extreme evolutionary rate, O. dioica retained enough phylogenetic signal for its position to be recovered with ML. This demonstrates that LBA is not responsible for the inferred grouping of tunicates and vertebrates, and represents a strong argument in favour of the authenticity of Olfactores. In addition, neither compositional bias nor heterotachy significantly influenced phylogenomic inference with our data set (see Supplementary Information). In fact, the compositional effect would act against Olfactores, because vertebrates and the amphioxus share similar amino acid compositions (Supplementary Fig. S3). In conclusion, the strongly supported monophyly of Olfactores cannot be explained by any kind of identifiable systematic bias (LBA, compositional bias, and heterotachy) and therefore constitutes the best current hypothesis for chordate phylogeny.
The monophyly of deuterostomes remained moderately supported in our phylogenomic analyses (Fig. 1). Also, the monophyly of chordates is not found in the ML tree, but is the only alternative not significantly rejected by likelihood-based statistical tests (Table 1). A unique origin of chordates and their distinctive features such as notochord and hollow nerve cord cannot be excluded. Our results nevertheless favoured the intriguing possibility of a sistergroup relationship between cephalochordates and echinoderms that seems robust to analyses aimed at avoiding compositional bias and
Figure 1 | Phylogenetic analyses of genomic data strongly support the grouping of tunicates and vertebrates into Olfactores. ML tree obtained from the analysis of 33,800 aligned amino acid positions under a WAG substitution matrix plus a four-category gamma rate correction (a 1⁄4 0.5) using two independent reconstruction algorithms (see Supplementary Information). Weighted maximum parsimony and bayesian inference using
966
thesameWAGþFþG4 modelandWAGþFþG4 pluscovarionmodel also retrieved the same topology (see Supplementary Information). Bootstrap proportions obtained after 100 ML (red) and 1,000 MP replicates (blue), as well as bayesian posterior probabilities (black) are shown for selected branches. A star indicates that all three values are maximal (100%, 100% and 1.0). Scale bar indicates number of changes per site.
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

 NATURE|Vol 439|23 February 2006 LETTERS
heterotachy (see Supplementary Information). Such a relationship has also been inferred from mitochondrial genomes16, but it lacks significant statistical support in both nuclear and mitochondrial analyses.
Although seemingly heretic, the grouping of echinoderms and cephalochordates constitutes an interesting working hypothesis. A similar situation was encountered a few years ago for the recently established sister-group relationship of echinoderms and hemichordates (Ambulacraria). The Ambulacraria hypothesis led to a reevaluation of morphological character evolution, with the presence of pharyngeal slits being interpreted as an ancestral feature of deuterostomes9. Similarly, a close relationship between echinoderms and cephalochordates would imply that a dorsal nerve chord was already present in the last common deuterostome ancestor and subsequently evolved into derived nervous systems in both hemichordates and echinoderms. Such a scenario seems a priori possible given the difficulties encountered in polarizing morpho-anatomical characters in both extant9 and fossil17 deuterostomes. However, a definitive conclusion will only be achieved through the phylogenetic analysis of more genes combined with an increased taxon sampling including the enigmatic xenoturbellidans, hemichordates, and a greater diversity of echinoderms. Nonetheless, the strong support obtained for Olfactores will probably not be affected, as these additional taxa are considered to be on the echinoderm side of the deuterostome tree5,18. This prediction is supported by the observation that removing the sea-urchin from our data set has almost no effect (Supplementary Fig. S4).
Despite this remaining uncertainty, our new phylogenetic hypothesis implies a serious re-evaluation of fundamental aspects of deuterostome evolution. The nature of their last common ancestor has been most extensively addressed from the paleontological point of view3. However, extant deuterostome lineages are morphologically so distinct that possible stem-group representatives found in the fossil record are difficult to recognize17. A sister-group relationship of tunicates and vertebrates to the exclusion of cephalochordates is compatible with the controversial calcichordate theory of chordate origins proposed by Jefferies19. However, it does not mean that this evolutionary scenario based on the functional reconstruction of
Table 1 | Results of likelihood-based tests of alternative topologies within deuterostomes
unusual fossils with calcite skeletons (cornutes and mitrates) and their interpretation as stem-group chordates19 is necessarily true. In fact, Jefferies10 coined the name Olfactores on the basis of the presence of a putatively homologous olfactory apparatus in fossils that were proposed to be precursors of tunicates and vertebrates. However, the phylogenetic position of cornutes and mitrates is still much debated, with the majority advocating echinoderm affinities for these controversial fossils20,21. At any rate, the present molecular evidence for a monophyletic group of tunicates and vertebrates might help to polarize morphological characters of basal deuterostome fossils, thereby leading to a better understanding of early deuterostome evolution.
Our results also prompt a reinterpretation of morphological data in deuterostome phylogeny. In particular, a close proximity between tunicates and vertebrates suggests that the presence of metameric segmentation classically used to unify cephalochordates and vertebrates might be considered as an ancestral feature that underwent a secondary reduction in tunicates9. More generally, this new phylogenetic picture is in agreement with an alternative hypothesis for chordate evolution based on a recent homology analysis of morphological structures in hemichordates and chordates22. This unorthodox view proposes that cephalochordates have retained many ancestral characters that have been secondarily lost in the morphologically more derived tunicates, and reveals 13 putative synapomorphies uniting tunicates and vertebrates to the exclusion of cephalochordates22. The monophyly of Olfactores invalidates the traditional textbook representation of chordate, and even deuterostome, evolution as a steady increase towards complexity culminating in the highly specialized brain of vertebrates9. This anthropocentric interpretation is perhaps best reflected by the terms ‘Euchordata’ (that is, ‘true chordates’) or ‘chordates with a brain’, which are used to designate the grouping of cephalochordates and vertebrates2. Tunicates should therefore no longer be considered as ‘primitive’ but rather as derived chordates with highly specialized lifestyles and developmental modes.
From the developmental point of view, our phylogenetic results help to understand the origin of the major evolutionary novelty constituted by the neural crest. This vertebrate innovation can be traced back to the origins of the chordate lineage, because ‘latent homologues’ of neural crest cells have been identified in both cephalochordates and tunicates23. However, evidence for migratory neural crest cells has so far been reported only in tunicates24, whereas their existence is still unproved in amphioxus. In light of the Olfactores hypothesis, these migratory cells may well have evolved in the last common ancestor of tunicates and vertebrates, after the divergence from cephalochordates, with these evolutionary precursor cells later giving birth to the neural crest along the vertebrate lineage24.
The newly proposed deuterostome phylogeny strengthens the view that tunicates and cephalochordates represent complementary models for studying the origin of the vertebrate developmental program. Indeed, tunicates are phylogenetically closer to vertebrates but are morphologically and molecularly highly derived with a trend towards genomic simplification25,26, whereas the more distantly related cephalochordates might have retained more ancestral characters27. The comparative analysis of available tunicate and vertebrate genomes with the upcoming amphioxus and sea-urchin genome sequences will be particularly valuable for understanding the evolution of new gene systems and structures involved in early vertebrate development.
METHODS
Data assembly. We built upon a phylogenomic data set consisting of 146 nuclear genes previously assembled to study animal phylogeny7. This data set was updated using the same protocol (see Supplementary Information) with new sequences publicly available from the Trace Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/Traces/) and the EST Database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/) of
 Trees
2ln[L]
554,914.8
554,967.2
Dln[L] AU SH
Best 0.947 1.000
52.4 0.071 0.415
RELL BP
0.938
0.061
             555,051.5 136.7 0.000* 0.019* 0.000*
       555,066.4
151.6 0.004* 0.007*
0.002*
       Results computed with a concatenated WAG þ F þ G4 model are given for the top four ranking topologies; the other 11 alternative topologies were rejected by all tests with
P , 0.001. L, likelihood value; AU, Approximatedly Unbiased test; SH, Shimodaira–Hasegawa test; RELL BP, Resampling of Estimated Log-Likelihood Bootstrap Percentage. *Statistically significant at the 5% level. E, echinoderms; C, cephalochordates; T, tunicates; V, vertebrates.
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group
967

 LETTERS NATURE|Vol 439|23 February 2006
GenBank at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Sequences from the appendicularian were generated by the Oikopleura dioica genome project (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/externe/ English/Projets/Projet_HG/HG.html).
As previously demonstrated7,8, taxon sampling has a major impact on phylogenomic studies. As an outgroup to the 14 available deuterostomes, we therefore selected the slowest-evolving taxa among available protostomes and fungi to reduce the potential impact of long-branch attraction14. Furthermore, we also incorporated all available cnidarians and choanoflagellates, allowing us efficiently to break the long branch leading to the distantly related fungal outgroup.
Phylogenetic analyses. Multiple methods using different optimality criteria and algorithms were used to analyse our phylogenomic data set. Weighted MP heuristic searches were conducted using PAUP28 with ten random additions of species and Tree Bisection and Reconnection branch swapping. MP bootstrap percentages were obtained after 1,000 replications using the same heuristic search strategy. Because of the computational difficulties involved in conducting ML searches for such a large data set7, ML analyses were conducted with different algorithms (see Supplementary Information for details). ML bootstrap percentages were obtained after 100 replications. Bayesian phylogenetic inferences were also conducted using parallel computing (see Supplementary Information for details).
Likelihood-based tests of alternative topologies were calculated using CONSEL13. ML branch lengths of alternative topologies were first inferred assuming a concatenated WAG þ F þ G4 model using TREE-PUZZLE29, sitewise log-likelihood values were then computed with CODEML30 and the P values of the different likelihood-based tests were finally calculated with CONSEL.
Received 9 August; accepted 19 October 2005.
1. 2. 3. 4.
5.
6. 7.
8. 9.
10. 11.
12.
13. 14. 15.
16.
17. 18.
19. 20.
21. 22.
968
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We thank S. Conway Morris, R. P. S. Jefferies, W. R. Jeffery and J. Mallatt for suggestions, and N. Lartillot and N. Rodrigue for critical readings of early versions of the manuscript. Oikopleura genome data were generated at Ge ́noscope Evry (France) with material and co-funding from the Sars International Centre. We are grateful to P. Wincker and the Ge ́noscope team. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by Ge ́nome Que ́bec, the Canadian Research Chair and the Universite ́ de Montre ́al, and the Re ́seau Que ́becois de Calcul de Haute Performance for computational resources.
Author Contributions H.P. conceived the study. D.C. contributed sequence data from the Oikopleura genome project. F.D., H.B. and H.P. assembled the data set and performed phylogenetic analyses. F.D. wrote the first draft of the manuscript and all authors contributed to the writing of its final version.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.P. (herve.philippe@umontreal.ca).
