 LETTERS
Minimal ProtoHox cluster inferred from bilaterian and cnidarian Hox complements
D. Chourrout1, F. Delsuc2, P. Chourrout3, R. B. Edvardsen1, F. Rentzsch1, E. Renfer1, M. F. Jensen1, B. Zhu4, P. de Jong4, R. E. Steele5 & U. Technau1
Bilaterian animals have a Hox gene cluster essential for patterning the main body axis, and a ParaHox gene cluster. Comparison of Hox and ParaHox genes has led workers to postulate that both clusters originated from the duplication of an ancient cluster named ProtoHox, which contained up to four genes with at least the precursors of anterior and posterior Hox/ParaHox genes1–3. However, the way in which genes diversified within the ProtoHox, Hox and ParaHox clusters remains unclear because no systematic study of non-bilaterian animals exists. Here we characterize the full Hox/ParaHox gene complements and genomic organization in two cnidarian species (Nematostella vectensis and Hydra magnipapillata), and suggest a ProtoHox cluster simpler than originally thought on the basis of three arguments. First, both species possess bilaterian-like anterior Hox genes, but their nonanterior genes do not appear as counterparts of either bilaterian central or posterior genes; second, two clustered ParaHox genes, Gsx and a gene related to Xlox and Cdx, are found in Nematostella vectensis; and third, we do not find clear phylogenetic support for a common origin of bilaterian Cdx and posterior genes, which might therefore have appeared after the ProtoHox cluster
duplication. Consequently, the ProtoHox cluster might have consisted of only two anterior genes. Non-anterior genes could have appeared independently in the Hox and ParaHox clusters, possibly after the separation of bilaterians and cnidarians.
Recent molecular phylogenies support the contention that the non-bilaterian Cnidaria is the sister group to bilaterians4,5 and can therefore provide information for reconstructing the early history of bilaterian homeobox gene complements. Earlier searches for cnidarian homeobox genes have revealed the presence of anteriorlike Hox genes beside Gsx, so that the ProtoHox cluster must have been duplicated before the cnidarian–bilaterian split. Previous reports6–13 have proposed that posterior Hox genes, but not central genes or Hox3, are also present in cnidarians. We used the publicly available high-coverage genome shotgun sequences to identify the complete set of homeobox genes of two distantly related cnidarians, the freshwater polyp Hydra magnipapillata (Hydrozoa) and the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis (Anthozoa). Nematostella is particularly informative because it is considered to represent the basal group within the Cnidaria14,15.
Eighteen Nematostella candidate homeodomains were allocated to
Figure 1 | Phylogenetic analyses of bilaterian and Nematostella Hox genes based on their homeodomain. a, Neighbour-net network of 82 bilaterian Hox and ParaHox genes based on maximum-likelihood (ML) distances estimated with a Jones–Taylor–Thornton (JTT) substitution matrix plus an eight-category gamma rate heterogeneity correction (JTT þ G8). Note the large differences in evolutionary rates between the fast-evolving posterior Hox and Cdx genes and the slowly evolving central Hox genes. Bayesian posterior probabilities (PP) for the major groups have been mapped on the network. A dash (2) indicates that the corresponding split was not observed in the bayesian analysis. Bootstrap proportions (BP) were inferred from the BioNJ algorithm for the same data set and JTT þ G8 ML distance estimates.
The scale bar represents the estimated number of changes per site. Note the position of the Cdx group, which is distinct from the posterior Hox group. b, Neighbour-net network of 92 Hox and ParaHox genes from bilaterian and Nematostella based on JTT þ G8 ML distance estimates. Note the position of non-anterior Nematostella genes (Nv HoxE and Nv HoxF). The major groups of bilaterian Hox and ParaHox proteins remain unaffected by the addition of the Nematostella data set. Bayesian posterior probabilities (PP) and bootstrap proportions (BP) were calculated as for the bilaterian data set. More detailed figures, including all sequence origins, are available in Supplementary Information.
1Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Thormoehlensgt. 55, 5008 Bergen, Norway. 2Laboratoire de Pale ́ontologie, Phyloge ́nie et Pale ́obiologie, Institut des Sciences de l’Evolution, UMR5554-CNRS, Universite ́ Montpellier II, Place Euge`ne Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex 05, France. 3American Hospital of Paris, 63, boulevard Victor Hugo, BP 109, 92202 Neuilly-sur-Seine Cedex, France. 4Children’s Hospital and Research Center at Oakland, Oakland, California 94609, USA. 5Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, 240D Medical Sciences I, Irvine, California 92697-1700, USA.
684
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group
Vol 442|10 August 2006|doi:10.1038/nature04863

 NATURE|Vol 442|10 August 2006
LETTERS
the Antennapedia class/Hox subclass and named on the basis of their relationship with vertebrate and fly sequences. Nine of them were clearly not Hox genes; these included the ParaHox gene Gsx, four distinct Mox genes, and Mnx, Gbx, Rough and Evx. Seven were considered as candidate Hox genes, including five genes already known13, which we renamed to avoid confusions with bilaterian Hox paralogues: HoxA (formerly anthox6), HoxB (previously unknown), HoxC (formerly anthox7), HoxDa and HoxDb (two distinct copies with an identical homeobox of a gene known as anthox8), HoxE (formerly anthox1a) and HoxF (formerly anthox1). Finally, two previously unknown genes showed higher divergence from Antp/Hox genes of other species (see below). In contrast, a search in the Hydra genome revealed only eight Antp/Hox genes, including one Mox gene, one Gsx gene and six candidate Hox genes.
To clarify the relationships between bilaterian and cnidarian Hox/ParaHox genes, we performed phylogenetic analyses (Supplementary Methods), including the evaluation of alternative hypotheses that receive some support in the data but would not be revealed with traditional tree-building methods. Most reliable trees were obtained with large data sets of homeodomain proteins from putative slowly evolving bilaterian species such as Nereis virens,
Cupiennius salei, Ptychodera flava and Branchiostoma floridae. First, with the use of bilaterian sequences only, we were able to recognize the major groups of Hox and ParaHox genes (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Information) and confirm that ParaHox genes Gsx and Xlox cluster with the anterior genes Hox1/2 and Hox3, respectively. Surprisingly, the group of ParaHox Cdx genes seemed divergent from all three groups of bilaterian Hox genes and showed only slight phylogenetic affinity (bootstrap proportions 1⁄4 38) with posterior Hox genes (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Information). The existence of a precursor for Hox posterior genes and Cdx in the ProtoHox cluster is therefore questionable.
Neighbour-net analyses clearly showed that within cnidarians Nematostella is the slowest evolving species, and the Nematostella data set was consequently used for extensive sequence comparisons. HoxA, HoxB, HoxC, HoxDa/Db and one divergent gene (Hox-related) clustered with the anterior genes (Hox1–3) of bilaterians (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Information). The precise relationships within the anterior Hox homeodomains could not be statistically resolved despite weak preferential affinities of HoxA/HoxB with Hox1/2, and of HoxC/HoxDa/HoxDb with Hox3 in several analyses (not shown). By comparison, HoxE and HoxF, which were previously tentatively classified as posterior genes13, did not preferentially group with anterior, central or posterior genes (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Information). Instead, they formed an independent and strongly supported branch. Last, one of the two divergent genes showed conflicting affinities in network analyses with Cdx and Xlox (Fig. 1b) and is therefore most probably a ParaHox gene. This gene, named Xlox/Cdx, is not a second Gsx gene, according to likelihood-based
Figure 2 | All physical linkages detected between cnidarian homeobox genes. a, Linkages associating Nematostella ANTP/Hox-like genes were validated by BAC library screening with individual Hox-like genes, before an in silico genome walk using the local assembler of shotgun traces allowed us to reconstruct the cluster DNA sequences. The positions of Hox and Hox-related genes including the ParaHox gene Gsx and their respective orientations are represented by red arrows, and other linked homeobox genes by blue arrows. Putative intervening non-homeobox genes are represented by circles, filled with green when expression is confirmed by EST alignments; sequence similarity with known genes was detected by BLASTX (Supplementary Information). b, Linkages associating other Nematostella homeobox genes were validated with an in silico genome walk using the local assembler of shotgun traces. c, Linkages associating Hydra ANTP/Hox-like genes including Gsx were validated with an in silico genome walk. Genes found in their environments have been annotated by using BLASTX and alignments with Hydra ESTs (Supplementary Information).
Figure 3 | Parsimonious consensus model for the evolution of Hox/ParaHox clusters of bilaterians. The ProtoHox cluster may have contained only two anterior genes (P1/2 and P3) and its duplication generated two equally simple Hox and ParaHox clusters. The prototypal bilaterian Hox cluster may have contained an extra non-anterior Hox gene (BNA), a precursor of future central and posterior genes. An independent duplication in the Hox cluster would have generated the precursor of cnidarian non-anterior Hox genes (CNA), which later on became HoxE and HoxF of Nematostella. The third ParaHox gene Cdx might have appeared through a duplication in the ParaHox cluster, and not in the ProtoHox cluster as generally proposed, either in early bilaterians or before the split of bilaterians and cnidarians. In the latter case, cnidarians had already simplified their ParaHox cluster through the loss of Xlox.
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group
685

 LETTERS NATURE|Vol 442|10 August 2006
statistical tests (Supplementary Information). When Hox genes from other cnidarians were included, the same picture appeared with cnidarian-specific non-anterior Hox genes, although their long branches tended to be attracted towards the fast-evolving posterior genes (Supplementary Information). Overall, cnidarians possess genuine anterior Hox genes, several non-anterior Hox genes not clearly related to central and posterior genes of bilaterians, and Gsx and a second candidate ParaHox gene related to Xlox and Cdx.
Using bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library screening and sequence reconstruction from shotgun data, we established linkages between distinct homeobox genes in the Nematostella genome. The results (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Information) showed a main cluster of five genes (HoxC/HoxDa/HoxDb/Evx/HoxA) in a tandem array over about 50 kilobases (kb). Linkage between the non-Hox gene Evx and a Hox gene has previously been shown in another anthozoan cnidarian16. We extended the cluster sequence and reached two other homeobox genes about 200 kb downstream: one is Mnx, a gene also present in the neighbourhood of chordate Hox clusters17, and the other is the orthologue of the fly gene Rough, which is on the same chromosome arm, 3R, as the ANT-C and BX-C complexes (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/guide/fly/). Another linkage was established between the anterior gene Hox-related and the non-anterior gene HoxE, whereas HoxB and HoxF seemed to be isolated in two distinct genome locations. In sum, linkages in the Nematostella genome provide support for the existence of an ancient cnidarian Hox cluster associating Evx, several anterior Hox genes and at least one non-anterior Hox gene. In the Nematostella lineage, the cluster was expanded through gene duplications. Our analyses robustly support the proposition that two precursor genes have been amplified into HoxC/HoxDa/HoxDb and into HoxE/HoxF subsets, respectively. A common origin for HoxA and HoxB is also indicated by the analyses, although with weaker support. The cluster was also affected by a rearrangement placing Evx between anterior Hox genes, and by at least two splits. Our linkage studies placed the candidate Xlox/Cdx gene immediately downstream of Gsx, in tandem orientation. Thus, this association can represent a ParaHox cluster. By comparison, genomic sequence reconstruction of the Hydra Hox gene complement provided evidence for strong degeneration of the Hox cluster in Hydra: only two non-anterior genes, most probably resulting from a recent duplication (HmHoxc1 and HmHoxc3), could be linked (Fig. 2c), and Gsx was the only ParaHox gene detected.
As lineage-specific duplications in the Hox cluster are rare within bilaterians, we wanted to know whether or not those found in Nematostella are limited to the Hox genes. For this we examined potential linkages between all other homeobox genes. Including the ten Hox-like genes mentioned above, we found a total of 139 homeobox genes, a surprisingly high number in comparison with other invertebrates (Table 1 and Supplementary Information). Phylogenetic analyses allowed the placing of at least 87 of those into 58 known groups of homeobox genes, out of 76 groups known for bilaterians. They also indicated that 42 unclassified genes might have arisen through recent amplifications of at most ten genes. By comparison, Hydra has a considerably smaller number of homeobox genes and gene groups. Because all Hydra homeobox gene groups have representatives in the Nematostella genome, we assume that the homeobox complement has been greatly reduced in the Hydra lineage (Table 1). Comparisons between the extended homeobox sequences of Nematostella allowed the detection of an additional 13 physical clusters (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Information). Four of these clusters may have a more ancient origin, either because they have been identified in the genomes of bilaterians or because they associate distantly related genes. The other nine clusters are undoubtedly the result of recent tandem duplications. We also did not detect obvious synteny conservation between the environments of well related but unlinked homeobox genes, as might be expected after whole-genome duplication (not shown). Hence the gene duplications observed in the Nematostella Hox genes represent a general phenomenon for the homeobox gene complement.
From our data, the most parsimonious model for the evolution of Hox/ParaHox clusters is as follows (Fig. 3). Two ProtoHox genes (P1/2 and P3) gave rise to the Hox cluster consisting of two anterior Hox genes Hox1/2 and Hox3, and to the ParaHox cluster with Gsx and Xlox. Subsequently, internal duplications expanded the Hox cluster, first by adding a precursor of the non-anterior genes. This gene might have appeared before the cnidarian–bilaterian split or independently in both lineages. Similarly, Cdx was added in the ParaHox cluster, either in the bilaterian lineage or before the cnidarian–bilaterian split. After this split, the cnidarian and bilaterian Hox clusters were further expanded through lineage-specific duplications. In this model, cnidarians never had genuine central and posterior Hox genes, and perhaps no Cdx gene either. Alternative models can be proposed but they seem to be less parsimonious. For example, the
Table 1 | Classification of homeobox genes from Nematostella vectensis and Hydra magnipapillata based on phylogenetic analyses
 Class/subclass Superfamily No. of gene groups (without Hox/ParaHox)
Known Nematostella Hydra
Antp/Hox-like Hox – – – ParaHox – – –
No. of genes (with Hox/ParaHox)
Nematostella Hydra
8 6
   Prd/Paired-like Q50 Prd/Paired-like K50
Prd/Pax S50 Pou
Lim
Tale
Six
Prox
Cut
Zfh
Hnf1 Unplaced Total
Unplaced Placed Unplaced Placed Unplaced
25
15 9 3 9 5 8 3 4 3 3 5 5 6 1 4 3 1–2 5 3 64252 663–464
55374–5 33252 1
31 1
2
21 1
3 4 76 58 26–28 139 52–53
2 1 Extended-Hox 2 2 1 5 1
EHG-box 3 3 3
Antp/NK-like Placed 20 18 8 35 11
 In Nematostella, a significant subset of genes could be allocated to known classes and superfamilies but diverged from known homeobox gene groups, while three genes could not be allocated to known classes (see also Supplementary Information). The Hydra genome shows a substantial reduction of the homeobox gene complement, and all identified gene groups are also present in Nematostella.
686
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group

 NATURE|Vol 442|10 August 2006 LETTERS
precursor of non-anterior genes could have already existed in the ProtoHox cluster but had then to evolve in multiple directions, leading to central/posterior Hox genes of bilaterians, HoxE/F of cnidarians, and Cdx. Alternatively, it is possible that there were even more such precursors in the ProtoHox cluster and some were lost in one lineage and/or in one of the two clusters.
Another main angle from which to interpret the existing data is that cnidarians are in fact simplified bilaterians, with a reduced mesoderm as one of the possible regressions13,18. A loss of central and posterior genes, or their rapid divergence into current non-anterior Hox genes of cnidarians, could have accompanied the process of simplification, as the Hox cluster breakdowns also would have done. Although this cannot be ruled out completely, extensive expressed sequence tag (EST)19 and genome surveys in Nematostella identified a surprising complexity of genes, including many genes lost in bilaterian lineages. This and the considerable degree of gene sequence conservation of the Nematostella lineage argues against a highly reduced and derived organism. In addition, more complex Hox gene complements in more basal metazoan phyla such as Placozoa, which would be indicative of gene loss in Cnidaria, could not be found20. We therefore argue that the common ancestor of cnidarians and bilaterians contained rather simple primordial Hox and ParaHox clusters that had distinct fates in Cnidaria and Bilateria. The ProtoHox cluster itself might have consisted of only two anterior genes.
METHODS
Homeodomains were searched within each set of cnidarian genome data with the use of TBLASTN at low stringency (1028) with representative query sequences from mouse and the other cnidarian and classified into known classes, subclasses and groups. Alignments of shotgun data sets with ESTs had indicated that the probability of a given gene’s being represented exceeded 98%. Phylogenetic analyses were based on maximum-likelihood, bayesian and distancebased network analyses of homeodomain proteins. Phylogenetic network analyses allowed us to detect conflicting signals and areas of uncertainty in the data, which appear with homeodomains as a result of reduced alignment lengths. Genomic sequences were extended by using the in-house-developed software Ma`D (Marche a` Droite), which performs walks and jumps using shotgun sequences and their physical links. Linkages between homeobox genes were established through BAC library screening and confirmed with polymerase chain reaction on positive BAC clones, with Ma`D reconstruction of long sequence contigs. All technical details are provided in Supplementary Information.
Received 11 January; accepted 8 May 2006.
7.
8. 9. 10.
11.
12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
18. 19. 20.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We thank D. Rokhsar for his efforts in heading the Nematostella Genome project at DoE-JGI, and the J. Craig Venter Institute and the National Human Genome Research Institute for the Hydra Genome Project. The initial EST screen in Nematostella was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the construction of the Nematostella BAC library was funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF). This is contribution ISEM-2006-37 of the Institut des Sciences de l’Evolution de Montpellier.
Author Contributions The project was conceived and the manuscript written by D.C. and U.T. The bioinformatic identification and genomic assemblies of the homeobox gene complement in the Hydra and Nematostella genome datasets were conducted by D.C. The software package including Ma`D was written by P.C., who conceived and trained it with D.C. The phylogenetic analyses were performed by F.D. R.B.E. also participated in the homeobox gene classification and phylogenetic analysis. The cloning of cDNAs and genomic clones of Hox-related genes was performed by U.T., E.R. and M.F.J.; BAC library screening was conducted by U.T. and E.R.; and BAC colony PCR was performed by M.F.J. The in situ hybridizations were performed by F.R. R.E.S. and U.T. are members of the Nematostella genome consortium, and R.E.S. is a member of the Hydra genome consortium. R.E.S., P.deJ. and U.T. were co-principal investigators on the NSF grant for the generation of the Nematostella BAC library; U.T. collected the animal material and prepared the DNA; and B.Z. generated the BAC library under the supervision of P.deJ.
Author Information Sequences have been deposited in GenBank with accession numbers DQ500742–DQ500879. Reprints and permissions information is available at npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.C. (Daniel.chourrout@sars.uib.no) and U.T. (Ulrich.technau@sars.uib.no).
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group
687
