   Molecular Ecology (2011) 20, 105–113 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04926.x
Nonadditive changes to cytosine methylation as a consequence of hybridization and genome duplication in Senecio (Asteraceae)
MATTHEW J. HEGARTY,* TOM BATSTONE,† GARY L. BARKER,† KEITH J. EDWARDS,† RICHARD J. ABBOTT‡ and SIMON J. HISCOCK†
*Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth University, Penglais Campus, Aberystwyth, Ceredigion SY23 3DA, UK, †School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UG, UK, ‡School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, Howard Mitchell Building, St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9TH, UK
Abstract
The merger of two or more divergent genomes within an allopolyploid nucleus can facilitate speciation and adaptive evolution in flowering plants. Widespread changes to gene expression have been shown to result from interspecific hybridisation and polyploidy in a number of plant species, and attention has now shifted to determining the epigenetic processes that drive these changes. We present here an analysis of cytosine methylation patterns in triploid F1 Senecio (ragwort) hybrids and their allohexaploid derivatives. We observe that, in common with similar studies in Arabidopsis, Spartina and Triticum, a small but significant proportion of loci display nonadditive methylation in the hybrids, largely resulting from interspecific hybridisation. Despite this, genome duplication results in a secondary effect on methylation, with reversion to additivity at some loci and novel methylation status at others. We also observe differences in methylation state between different allopolyploid generations, predominantly in cases of additive methylation with regard to which parental methylation state is dominant. These changes to methylation state in both F1 triploids and their allohexaploid derivatives largely mirror the overall patterns of nonadditive gene expression observed in our previous microarray analyses and may play a causative role in generating those expression changes. These similar global changes to DNA methylation resulting from hybridisation and genome duplication may serve as a source of epigenetic variation in natural populations, facilitating adaptive evolution. Our observations that methylation state can also vary between different generations of polyploid hybrids suggests that newly formed allopolyploid species may display a high degree of epigenetic diversity upon which natural selection can act.
Keywords: epigenetics, hybridisation, methylation, polyploidy, senecio
Received 5 July 2010; revision received 15 September 2010; accepted 4 October 2010
Introduction
Interspecific hybridisation and subsequent genome duplication have received much attention in recent years as important mechanisms in the formation of new species and drivers of adaptive evolution in flowering plants (reviews in Rieseberg 1997; Doyle et al. 2008; Hegarty &
Correspondence: Matthew Hegarty, Fax: 01970 622350; E-mail: ayh@aber.ac.uk
Hiscock 2008; Soltis & Soltis 2009). New techniques for large-scale analysis of gene expression have enabled researchers to explore the effects of genome mergers and duplications on transcription, and have shown that both homoploid (diploid) hybrids and allopolyploid hybrids are subject to widespread alterations to gene expression (Hegarty et al. 2006, 2008, 2009; Lai et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2006; Flagel et al. 2008). Many of these changes are nonadditive – that is to say, the hybrids do not simply display expression levels that are the average of their
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

106 M. J. HEGARTY ET AL.
parental taxa (Wang et al. 2006; Hegarty et al. 2008, 2009; Pumphrey et al. 2009) – and it is this novelty in gene expression that can potentially result in hybrid vigour and facilitate adaptive evolution (Wendel & Doyle 2005; Hegarty et al. 2008). The focus has now shifted to determining the epigenetic factors resulting in these nonadditive expression changes in allopolyploids, whether these are alterations in DNA methylation, histone acetylation, cis ⁄ trans regulation or the activity of small RNAs. Of these, DNA methylation is perhaps the best understood, having first been correlated with the phenomenon of nucleolar dominance in the allotetraploid Arabidopsis suecica, which undergoes repression of rDNA genes from the A. thaliana genome, leading to almost total expression dominance of the A. arenosa parent (Chen & Pikaard 1997; Pikaard 1999, 2000). More recent studies in several allopolyploid systems have shown rapid and widespread changes to the overall methylation profile in both F1 hybrids and their allopolyploid derivatives (Shaked et al. 2001; Salmon et al. 2005; Lukens et al. 2006). Many of these changes occur in the F1 hybrid and are maintained following genome duplication, suggesting that epigenetic regulation of gene expression is a crucial component in allowing the two (or more) divergent genomes to co-exist within a hybrid nucleus.
The allohexaploid hybrid Senecio cambrensis (6n = 60) originated in the United Kingdom within the last 80years from the union of the invasive diploid S. squalidus (2n = 20, self-incompatible) and the endemic tetraploid S. vulgaris (4n = 40, self-compatible) (Ashton & Abbott 1992). The initial hybridisation event resulted in a sterile triploid, S. x baxteri, which subsequently underwent a whole genome duplication event to give rise to the fertile, self-compatible S. cambrensis. It is known that rates of unreduced gamete formation are higher in wide interspecific crosses (Ramsey & Schemske 2002), and Chapman & Burke (2007) and Paun et al. (2009) have recently demonstrated that the likelihood of allopolyploidy is significantly greater the more distinct the parental taxa. In the case of S. cambrensis, it is noteworthy that in addition to the parent species differing in ploidy, molecular analysis has shown that they are located in different ITS clades within the genus Senecio (Comes & Abbott 2001) and are genetically divergent based on AFLP profiles (Abbott et al. 2007). Extensive crossing experiments suggest that the original cross that gave rise to S. x baxteri, and in turn S. cambrensis, involved S. squalidus as the pollen donor (as with the hybrids used here) because the reciprocal cross is rarely successful (Lowe & Abbott 2000).
Senecio cambrensis has arisen on at least two separate occasions in the United Kingdom, with distinct populations identified in both Wales and Scotland (Ashton & Abbott 1992). We previously compared gene expression
in mature flower buds of both S. x baxteri and natural S. cambrensis with the parental taxa using customised cDNA microarrays and observed nonadditive gene expression in both hybrids (Hegarty et al. 2005, 2008). These studies suggested that the degree of nonadditivity was higher in the initial triploid S. x baxteri (approximately twice that observed in the allohexaploid), indicating that genome doubling may play a distinct, secondary role in gene expression change in allopolyploids. Subsequent studies using resynthesised lines of S. cambrensis showed that, when compared to S. x baxteri, a large proportion of microarray features (approximately 58%) displayed an immediate shift (in the first generation or S0 allohexaploid) towards an expression pattern approximating that seen in wild S. cambrensis (Hegarty et al. 2006). These expression patterns were then largely conserved in the subsequent (S1–S4) four selfed generations tested, with an additional 17% of features showing a more gradual shift towards a wild S. cambrensis-like expression pattern.
To determine whether DNA methylation in these hybrids is similarly affected, as in the case of wheat, Arabidopsis and Spartina, we undertook a methylationsensitive AFLP (MSAP) analysis of the parental taxa, three triploid lines and their S0–S1 allohexaploid derivatives. The MSAP technique (Xiong et al. 1999) involves digestion of genomic DNA with a standard, rare-cutter enzyme (i.e. EcoRI) and one of a pair of isoschizomeric enzymes that share a restriction site but are either sensitive or insensitive to cytosine methylation. In this case, we employed HpaII, which is sensitive to methylation of either cytosine in its recognition site (CCGG) and MspI, which is sensitive only to methylation of the external cytosine. Comparing the two AFLP profiles produced from each isoschizomer enables identification of the methylation status of a given locus, as described in Table 1. Analysis of the MSAP profiles of the triploids relative to those of the parents should enable identification of the level of nonadditivity resulting from
Table 1 HpaII ⁄ MspI state
HpaII MspI ++
)+ )) +)
banding patterns and locus methylation
Methylation status
CCGG (unmethylated)
Cm CGG (methylation of internal
cytosine)
m CCGG or m Cm CGG (methylation of
external cytosine)
hmCCGG (hemimethylation of external
cytosine)
   Note: In the case of methylation of the external cytosine, it is not possible from the MSAP technique alone to determine whether the internal cytosine is also methylated.
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

interspecific hybridisation, whilst comparison of the S0 allohexaploid lines to the corresponding triploids would determine whether whole genome duplication has a secondary effect on DNA methylation, as was observed at the level of gene expression. Finally, inclusion of the S1 allohexaploids would determine the extent to which methylation patterns are stable within early generations of a newly formed allopolyploid. We report here the findings of this analysis.
Methods
Plant material
Seeds for the S0 and S1 allohexaploids were retained from previous colchicine treatment of S. x baxteri lines as described in Hegarty et al. (2006). S. x baxteri individuals were maintained clonally. Three plants from each triploid and its associated allohexaploid derivatives were grown as described in Hegarty et al. (2005) and mature flower bud tissue harvested from each individual. The exact parental plants used to synthesise the S. x baxteri lines were not available, so instead three sibling plants were grown from seed produced by random mating within each of the original parents. See Fig. 1 for a diagrammatic overview of the relationships between generations.
Methylation-sensitive AFLP
Genomic DNA was extracted from mature flower buds (bracts removed) via the CTAB protocol (Sambrook & Russell 2001) and then further purified using spin columns from a Qiagen Plant DNEasy Miniprep kit as per the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA concentration and purity was checked using a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Products). For each sample, 100 lg genomic DNA was digested with 1 unit each of either EcoRI⁄HpaII or EcoRI⁄MspI for 3 h at 37 °C in 1· TA buffer (10 mM Tris-Ac, 10 mM MgAc, 50 mM KAc, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.9) with 3 lg BSA. Adaptor ligation was performed by adding Eco and Hpa adaptors (25 pmol each) in the presence of 1· T4 ligase buffer and 0.5 units T4 DNA ligase. Ligation was carried out overnight at 16 °C and the ligated samples diluted 1:4 with ddH2O prior to preselective PCR amplification.
Preselective PCR amplification was performed in 10 ll reaction volumes using 1 ll of the diluted ligation mix as template with 2.5 pmol of each primer (Eco + A ⁄ Hpa + 0, see Table 2). To improve reaction efficiency, 15 lg BSA was included in each reaction. PCRs were placed in a thermal cycler set to the following parameters: 1 hold at 72 °C for 2 min ⁄ 20 cycles of 94°Cfor20s,56°Cfor30s,72°Cfor2min⁄1holdat 72 °C for 10 min. Following amplification, samples were diluted 1:4 with ddH2O. Selective PCR amplification was performed using 1 ll of diluted preselective PCR product as template in a standard PCR with 2.5 pmol of each selective primer (Eco + 3 ⁄ Hpa + 3). Thermal cycler parameters were as follows: 1 hold at 94 °C for 2min⁄10 cycles of 94°C for 20s, 66°C ()1°C per cycle) for 30 s, 72 °C for 2 min⁄25 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 56 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 3 min⁄1 hold at 72 °C for 10 min. Selective PCR products were diluted to 1:1000 with 1· TE buffer, ROX1000 internal size standard and HiDi Formamide (both Applied Biosystems Inc.), as per the manufacturer’s instructions, prior to analysis using an Applied Biosystems ABI3730 capillary sequencer (service provided by the NERC Molecular Genetics facility, University of Sheffield).
Data analysis
Six selective primer combinations were used to screen 33 plants as detailed in Table 2. The resulting fragment profiles were then loaded into the GeneMapper v3.7 software (Applied Biosystems) for further analysis. One primer combination (Eco + AAC ⁄ Hpa + AAG) failed to amplify in any of the samples and was removed from further analysis. For each remaining primer combination, automated size detection and peak binning was employed followed by manual editing of bins to
CHANGES TO METHYLATION CAUSED BY ALLOPOLYPLOIDY 107
 S. squalidus (2n = 20)
S. vulgaris (4n = 40)
 S. x baxteri
hybrid line 1 (3n = 30)
S. cambrensis S0 synthetic line 1
(6n = 60)
S. cambrensis S1 synthetic line 1
X
S. x baxteri
hybrid line 2 (3n = 30)
S. cambrensis S0 synthetic line 2
(6n = 60)
S. cambrensis S1 synthetic line 2
S. x baxteri
hybrid line 3 (3n = 30)
S. cambrensis S0 synthetic line 3
(6n = 60)
S. cambrensis S1 synthetic line 3
    Genome duplication via colchicine treatment
       Selfing
   Fig. 1 Generation of triploid and allohexaploid synthetic lines.
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

108 M. J. HEGARTY ET AL.
Table 2 Oligonucleotides for methylation-sensitive AFLP and number of loci
 Sequence (5¢–3¢) CTCGTAGACTGCGTACC
AATTGGTACGCAGTC GATCATGAGTCCTGCT CGAGCAGGACTCATGA GACTGCGTACCAATTCA ATCATGAGTCCTGCTCGG GACTGCGTACCAATTCAAC GACTGCGTACCAATTCACG ATCATGAGTCCTGCTCGGCTG ATCATGAGTCCTGCTCGGCTT ATCATGAGTCCTGCTCGGAAG
exclude shoulder peaks and unreliable loci (varying between replicates). Peak height data were then exported and loaded into the R package AFLPScore version 1.4a (Whitlock et al. 2008) for peak calling using a relative threshold of 30% mean peak height for each locus. Data were converted into binary presence⁄absence scores for each locus and exported for manual analysis as an Excel spreadsheet (see Data S1, Supporting information).
Results
We successfully amplified MSAP products from all 33 individuals for five of the six primer combinations tested. Initial automated peak binning using the GeneMapper v3.7 package identified 100–200 loci per primer combination. However, approximately 40% of these were variable between replicates (primarily because of low signal intensities causing some samples to fall below the antinoise cut-off). Other peaks varied between replicates of the parental taxa and, because these were not the precise parental individuals but progeny, were also removed. Manual binning of reliable peaks resulted in a total of 408 loci across the five primer combinations (summarised in Table 2). Data were exported from the AFLPScore package as binary presence⁄absence scores and surveyed to determine levels of nonadditivity in the hybrids. Of the loci surveyed, 264 (64.7%) showed polymorphisms between the parental taxa S. squalidus and S. vulgaris. In the remaining 144 loci that were monomorphic in the parents, 75.7% were monomorphic across all hybrid samples tested. Surveying the polymorphic loci, it was found that the triploid hybrids each displayed similar overall methylation patterns (Table 3), with a strong bias in favour of the S. vulgaris (maternal) methylation state for each locus (an average of 57.36% of loci between the three triploid lines). In addition, the triploids also displayed approximately equivalent levels of nonadditive methylation (13.4% on average).
Oligo
Primer Combination Eco + AGC⁄Hpa + CTG
Eco + AAC⁄Hpa + CTT Eco + AGC⁄Hpa + CTT Eco + AAC⁄Hpa + AAG Eco + ACG⁄Hpa + AAG Eco + AAC⁄Hpa + CTT
No. of Loci
119 88
80 Failed 69
53
 EcoRI
EcoRI
Hpall
Hpall
Eco +
Hpa
Eco +
Eco +
Hpa + CTG Hpa + CTT Hpa + AAG
adaptor 1 adaptor 2 adaptor 1 adaptor 2 A
AAC (NED) ACG (6-FAM)
 Table 3 Summarised methylation status of hybrid lines
 Methylation State
Additive (SS)
Additive (SV)
Additive (monomorphic) Nonadditive
Same as triploid (additive)
Same as triploid (nonadditive) Differs from triploid (additive SS) Differs from triploid (additive SV) Differs from triploid (monomorphic) Novel nonadditive methylation
Same as triploid + S0 (additive)
Same as triploid + S0 (nonadditive) Same as S0 not triploid (additive) Same as S0 not triploid (nonadditive) Same as triploid not S0 (additive) Same as triploid not S0 (nonadditive) Differs from triploid + S0 (additive SS) Differs from triploid + S0 (additive SV) Novel nonadditive methylation
Line1Line2Line3
Percentage of Loci (triploids)
24.58 24.58 22.26 56.15 57.14 58.80
4.65 6.98 4.65 14.62 11.30 14.29 Percentage of Loci (S0 allohexaploids) 76.17 78.86 79.53
9.73 9.73 9.73 5.03 4.36 4.03 5.37 3.69 2.35 2.01 0.67 2.68 1.68 2.68 1.68
Percentage of Loci (S1 allohexaploids) 72.06 72.38 66.35
7.62 7.94 6.35 7.62 5.71 3.49 0.32 1.27 0.63 3.81 3.17 1.90 0.95 0.00 2.54 2.54 4.76 7.62 3.49 2.22 7.62 1.59 2.54 3.49
  To determine whether methylation patterns were maintained following genome duplication, the methylation status of the S0 allohexaploids was compared to the triploid lines from which they were derived. Table 3 shows a summary of methylation states in the S0 lines relative to their progenitors. In the vast majority of cases, the allohexaploids retained the methylation state observed in the triploid. On average, 78.19% of these cases involved additive methylation, whilst 9.73% of loci involved retention of a nonadditive methylation profile. An average of 10.07% of loci displayed a shift relative to the triploid in the specific parental
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

methylation state favoured (4.47% shift to S. squalidus, 3.8% shift to S. vulgaris, 1.79% shift to both). Finally, an average of 2% of loci showed novel nonadditive methylation not observed in the triploids.
The analysis was then extended to the S1 allohexaploids, comparing them to both their triploid ancestors and the preceding S0 generation. These results are summarised in Table 3. As with the S0 allohexaploids, overall methylation state was highly similar between the three lines. Again, the most common result was retention of methylation status compared to both the triploid and the S0 allohexaploid, with an average 70.26% of loci showing retention of additive methylation patterns and 7.3% of nonadditive methylation. A further 5.61% of loci showed retention of additive methylation in the two allohexaploid generations, whereas the triploid had displayed nonadditivity. Methylation status was not always consistent between the two allohexaploid generations; however, in 4.13% of cases, loci displayed a shift in methylation state to that seen in the triploid but not in the S0 allohexaploid. Furthermore, the S1 generation showed a return to additivity in 9.42% of cases, where both the triploid and the S0 allohexaploids had been nonadditive. As with the S0 generation, though, there was a small (2.54% average) degree of novel nonadditivity.
Discussion
In accordance with our previous studies of gene expression in triploid S. x baxteri and its derivative allohexaploid S. cambrensis, we observe that, whilst cytosine methylation in both these hybrid taxa is largely the additive product of the two parental patterns, a significant degree of nonadditivity also exists. In our microarray analysis, we noted nonadditive expression involving 7.42% of array features in the case of the triploids and 3.03% in that of wild S. cambrensis (Hegarty et al. 2008). Here, we note that overall methylation status is well conserved between different hybrid lines; thus, whilst individual loci may display differences, the global percentages of different methylation states are highly similar between lines. In all three triploid lines, approximately 13.4% of loci show nonadditive methylation, although the precise type of methylation was not identical between lines in all cases. Whilst it is typical to consider these alterations solely as a consequence of interspecific hybridisation (Salmon et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2006), it is feasible that the change in ploidy resulting from genome merger (i.e. to the triploid state) also contributes to the methylation changes recorded. Indeed, there is evidence from a study of autotriploid dandelions (Verhoeven et al. 2010) that ploidy change alone can result in significant levels of methylation
change. An analysis of the allotetraploid hybrid Senecio eboracensis, which possesses the same parental genomes but in different contributions (Abbott et al. 2003), may help determine the relative impact of hybridisation and ploidy change in the initial genome merger.
Levels of nonadditive methylation observed in other allopolyploid systems are variable: 8.3% in Arabidopsis (Madlung et al. 2002), 9% in Brassica (Gaeta et al. 2007), 13–20% in wheat (Dong et al. 2005; Pumphrey et al. 2009) and as high as 30% in Spartina (Salmon et al. 2005). It has been speculated that the higher genome copy number in wheat (6·) and Spartina (12·) might explain their greater levels of methylation, although Doyle et al. (2008) point out that both species are monocots, which tend to possess a higher GC content (and thus potential for methylation) than eudicots. The fact that conserved methylation changes between the Senecio hybrids are more on a par with the levels seen in Arabidopsis and Brassica suggests that this latter theory may be correct, as S. cambrensis possesses the same ploidy as wheat. We should note, however, that the wheat genome is significantly larger than that of Senecio (2C genome sizes of 33.96 Gbp wheat; 5.05 Gbp S. cambrensis) and is known to contain a significant amount of repetitive DNA including large numbers of retroelements. It is therefore probable that alterations to methylation are more necessary to prevent widespread activation of these genetic regions in wheat and similar species. Indeed, studies of methylation in Spartina (Parisod et al. 2010) showed that such changes frequently occur in the vicinity of transposable elements and, perhaps as a result, no transposition burst was detected in the Spartina hybrids analysed. Methylation change therefore appears to play a frequent role in genome mergers, but there are exceptions: despite significant differential gene expression in the allotetraploid Gossypium hirsutum, almost no differences in methylation could be observed between the hybrid and its parental taxa (Liu et al. 2001) nor do the parental genomes undergo any significant rearrangement. In this situation, it appears that subfunctionalisation of the two genomes is the primary cause of phenotypic variation (Adams et al. 2004; Liu & Adams 2007). Exactly what factors determine the response of the parental genomes to hybridisation are largely unknown, although the degree of parental divergence is speculated to play a large role (Paun et al. 2009).
In further accordance with our expression analyses, we observe that nonadditive methylation in S. x baxteri triploids is maintained, on average, in only 73.6% and 55.6% of cases in the S0 and S1 allohexaploids, respectively. In approximately 73% of cases observed in our microarrays, the resynthesised allohexaploid lines (S0– S4) displayed either an immediate or gradual shift
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
CHANGES TO METHYLATION CAUSED BY ALLOPOLYPLOIDY 109

110 M. J. HEGARTY ET AL.
towards an expression pattern similar to that of wild S. cambrensis (Hegarty et al. 2006). It seems likely, therefore, that our previous observation that nonadditivity results from hybridisation but can be partially reduced because of genome duplication also holds true when applied to DNA methylation. This again matches observations from MSAP analysis of Spartina allopolyploids (Salmon et al. 2005), which showed that a resynthesised allopolyploid retained 71.4% of the nonadditive methylation patterns observed in the F1 hybrid. These findings were again confirmed when assessing methylation changes associated with transposable elements (Parisod et al. 2010), with the additional observation that many of the changes seen in the F1 hybrid involved loss of parental markers (usually in the maternal genome), indicating that such changes involved structural rearrangements to the parental genomes. A similar process may be at play in S. x baxteri, because MSAP markers also detect structural changes: indeed, wild populations of S. cambrensis do show evidence of intergenomic recombination (Abbott et al. 2007), again favouring the S. vulgaris genome as with our triploid lines here. A comparison of AFLP and MSAP loci in the synthetic hybrids would be required to confirm whether structural changes contribute to the altered MSAP profiles reported here.
By contrast, most of the differences observed in allopolyploid Spartina involved alterations to methylation status, rather than structural changes. Similar findings have also been identified in Brassica, where most of the methylation changes identified in the S0 allotetraploid were maintained in S5 lines, but with a number of revertants and novel changes present as well (Gaeta et al. 2007). The key finding from our analysis, however, is that the global patterns of DNA methylation change observed in our experiment strongly mirror the global changes in gene expression observed in our microarray analyses, indicating a possible underlying causation. Whilst this requires further investigation of the specific loci showing methylation differences, the similarities between changes in gene expression and DNA methylation are nevertheless striking. For example, we note that a number of loci displayed novel nonadditivity in both the S0 and S1 allohexaploids (2.01% on average in the S0 lines, 2.54% in the S1), again a point of consistency between this study and our earlier microarray expression analysis. The overall level of nonadditive methylation may therefore not actually decrease as a consequence of genome duplication, but instead the level of conserved methylation may be lessened. We also observe that a proportion of loci appear to show unstable methylation patterns across generations in the hexaploids, with an average of 16.08% of loci showing differences between the S0 and S1 lines (including the
aforementioned novel nonadditive methylation). Of these, the majority consist of cases where the S1 allohexaploids revert to additivity or favour a different parental methylation state to the S0 line. This reversion to an additive profile is also observed between the triploids and the S0 plants and agrees with observations from the microarray data that wild S. cambrensis often showed an opposing expression pattern to S. x baxteri. However, approximately one-quarter of loci also display a shift relative to the S0 allohexaploids to favour the methylation state seen in the triploid.
These findings suggest that the methylation state of some loci may vary as a consequence of segregation. This may explain the novel changes observed by Gaeta et al. (2007) in their S5 allopolyploids of Brassica napus. Similarly, an analysis of natural populations of the allopolyploid Tragopogon miscellus (Buggs et al. 2009), where hybridisation occurred at least 40 generations ago, identified a random loss of one parental homoeologue at a rate of 3.2% across 10 loci in 57 natural hybrids from five populations. In addition, a further 6.8% of loci showed evidence of gene silencing in one parental copy. The loci lost ⁄ silenced were not consistent across populations or individuals, although within populations, there was some conservation in the loci affected. Whilst this study did not note any homoeologue loss ⁄ silencing in resynthesised S0 hybrids, the variability in silencing after such an extended period of time since hybrid formation suggests that independently formed hybrids can still display significant levels of epigenetic variation. Both of these analyses assayed a limited number of loci using techniques such as cDNAAFLP or CAPS. With the advent of new technologies for global analysis of DNA methylation such as MSAP and next-generation sequencing (Salmon & Ainouche 2010), it would be interesting to analyse later generation allohexaploid derivatives at a global scale to investigate the longer-term changes in methylation as hybrid genomes undergo recombination and adaptation. Such studies may therefore provide further insights into which epigenetic changes are mandated by hybridity, and which may vary between populations and serve as a source of novelty upon which selection may act.
If nonadditive DNA methylation is common in plant hybrids, but has the potential to vary depending upon ploidy and ⁄ or generation after hybrid origin, what then are the implications for plant evolution? Many of the epigenetic changes observed in hybrids are likely to involve structural rearrangements of the parental DNA, enabling two or more divergent genomes to co-exist within the same nucleus, as per the findings of Parisod et al. (2010). However, evidence from a variety of plant systems including Arabidopsis (Comai et al. 2000; Madlung et al. 2002) and Tragopogon (Buggs et al. 2009)
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

suggests that a small but significant number of these changes can impact upon gene expression and thus phenotype. Kalisz & Purugganan (2004) discussed the need for further research into the variation of stably inherited DNA methylation (at loci dubbed ‘epialleles’) in natural populations, as the extent to which epigenetic variation contributes to phenotypic differences in the wild was unknown. Such studies are still limited, although Johannes et al. (2009) used Arabidopsis thaliana as a model to demonstrate that epiallelic variation could contribute to heritable changes in complex trait phenotypes (flowering time, plant height) over at least eight generations, highlighting the importance of incorporating epigenetic data into population genetics studies. One of the first such studies has used MSAP in three ecologically diverged species of allopolyploid orchids with common parental taxa (Paun et al. 2010), demonstrating that epigenetic variation between taxa appears to correlate with adaptation to different habitats and also with gene expression. Epigenetic variation between independently formed hybrids and their derivatives may therefore serve as a source of phenotypic novelty, underlying both ecological adaptation and speciation.
Conclusion
The key finding of this study is that nonadditive changes to DNA methylation in Senecio triploid F1 hybrids and their allopolyploid derivatives largely mirror the patterns of nonadditive gene expression observed in our previous microarray analyses of patterns of gene expression and that the bulk of these changes occur as a consequence of genome merger in the triploid hybrid S. x baxteri rather than of genome duplication, although the ploidy change in the triploid may also be a contributory factor. Nevertheless, just as we observed in our gene expression studies, polyploidisation also results in a secondary shift in methylation pattern (largely a return to additivity) in the allohexaploids. Despite this, there remains a degree of instability in the methylation status of the allohexaploids, with novel examples of nonadditivity occurring in both S0 and S1 lines as well as differences between S0 and S1 methylation. By far, the greatest proportion of changes involve differences in additive loci regarding which parental methylation state is dominant, indicating that genome duplication (and thus copy number) may influence the epigenetic regulation of the parental genomes in allopolyploids. This variation in DNA methylation – and thus regulation of gene expression – between different generations of allopolyploids suggests the potential for a high degree of diversity in newly formed allopolyploids. Selection, whether at the level of envi-
ronment or simply for successful combinations of the merged genomes, will ultimately fix many of these methylation patterns, although others will continue to segregate within the population. This study represents the first indication that global patterns of methylation change appear to correlate with nonadditive gene expression in newly formed allopolyploid hybrids. As more genomic tools become available to study epigenetic changes in-depth, it should prove possible to begin to identify key patterns of methylation in hybrids that underpin specific changes in gene expression and thus phenotype.
Author contributions
MJH conducted the plant growth, generation of MSAP products and data analysis, as well as acting as primary author of the manuscript. SJH directed the project and preparation of the manuscript. TB provided technical support for MSAP production. RJA provided plant materials and assisted with initial creation of the hybrid lines and revision of the manuscript. KJE and GLB provided input on data analysis.
Authorship
MJH is a core-funded Research Fellow at Aberystwyth University, with a variety of research interests involving genetic diversity. TB currently works as a research assistant for SJH on a NERC-funded Senecio genomics project at the University of Bristol. SJH runs the Bristol Senecio group and has an interest in genome evolution, adaptation and speciation and plant mating systems. KJA runs the Functional Genomics Group at Bristol and GLB is lead bioinformatician. RJA has a longstanding interest in speciation and divergence in Senecio and heads a genetic mapping programme at the University of St. Andrews.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Terry Burke and Andy Krupa of the NERC Molecular Genetics node, University of Sheffield, UK, for their assistance in optimising the MSAP procedure and for providing access to their capillary sequencer for analysing the products. We are also grateful to three anonymous referees for their comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. The work
Ó 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
CHANGES TO METHYLATION CAUSED BY ALLOPOLYPLOIDY 111
was funded by a NERC awarded to SJH.
References
research
grant
(NE ⁄ D005353 ⁄ 1)
