   Molecular Ecology (2009) 18, 4240–4255 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04348.x
Complete mitochondrial DNA replacement in a Lake Tanganyika cichlid fish
B. NEVADO,*,** S. KOBLMU ̈ LLER,† C. STURMBAUER,† J. SNOEKS,‡,§ J. USANO-ALEMANY– and E. VERHEYEN*,**
*Department Vertebrates, Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, Vautierstraat 29, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, †Department of Zoology, Karl-Franzens-University Graz, Universita ̈tplatz 2, 8010 Graz, Austria, ‡Zoology Department, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Leuvensesteenweg 13, B-3080 Tervuren, Belgium, §Laboratory for Animal Diversity and Systematics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, –Centro de Investigacio ́n Agraria de Albaladejito, 16194 Cuenca, Spain, **Evolutionary Ecology Group, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, B-2020 Antwerpen, Belgium
Abstract
We used nuclear and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences from specimens collected throughout Lake Tanganyika to clarify the evolutionary relationship between Lamprologus callipterus and Neolamprologus fasciatus. The nuclear data support the reciprocal monophyly of these two shell-breeding lamprologine cichlids. However, mtDNA sequences show that (i) L. callipterus includes two divergent and geographically disjunct (North–South) mtDNA lineages; and that (ii) N. fasciatus individuals cluster in a lineage sister group to the northern lineage of L. callipterus. The two mtDNA lineages of L. callipterus diverged c. 684 kya to 1.2 Ma, coinciding with a major water level low stand in Lake Tanganyika, which divided the lake into isolated sub-lakes. This suggests that the two mtDNA lineages originated as the result of the separation of L. callipterus populations in different sub-basins. The incongruent phylogenetic position of N. fasciatus can best be explained by an ancient unidirectional introgression from L. callipterus into N. fasciatus. Remarkably, our data indicate that this event resulted in the complete mtDNA replacement in N. fasciatus. Our data suggest that hybridization occurred soon after the divergence of the two L. callipterus mtDNA lineages, probably still during the water level low stand, and that subsequently the invading mtDNA lineage spread throughout the lake.
Keywords: hybridization, introgression, lake-level fluctuations, Lamprologus callipterus, Neolamprologus fasciatus, phylogeography
Received 20 March 2009; revision accepted 29 July 2009
Introduction
The creative role of hybridization in the evolutionary history of animals has only recently been acknowledged, with the number of reported cases growing exponentially in the last twenty years (Baack & Rieseberg 2007; Schwenk et al. 2008) and involving species of invertebrates (e.g. Mallet et al. 2007) and vertebrates such as birds (e.g. Grant & Grant 2008), amphibians (e.g. Plo ̈tner et al. 2008), reptiles (e.g. McGuire et al. 2007), fishes (e.g. McDonald et al. 2008)
Correspondence: B. Nevado, Fax: 0032 2 627 41 41; E-mail: bruno.nevado@naturalsciences.be
and mammals (e.g. Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2009a). Hybridization may lead to speciation by spontaneous formation of new recombinant individuals or polyploid species (Dowling & Secor 1997; Salzburger et al. 2002), to creation of new genetic variation upon which natural selection can act (Grant & Grant 1994, 2008), to reinforcement of species boundaries when hybrids have lower fitness than either parental species (Pfennig 2003; Kronforst et al. 2007) or to the introduction of specific traits from one species into another by introgression (Barton 2001; Kim et al. 2008).
Of particular interest is the role of hybridization in well-studied adaptive radiations. Traditionally, hybridization in such systems was thought to be of little
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

importance because of its potential to disrupt the barriers to gene flow, which were usually perceived as essential elements maintaining the integrity of species. However, recent empirical evidence (e.g. Salzburger et al. 2002; Shaw 2002; Mallet et al. 2007; Grant & Grant 2008) and theoretical developments (e.g. Seehausen 2004; Seehausen et al. 2008) argue for a more important role of hybridization in adaptive radiations.
In East African lakes, cichlid fishes (Perciformes: Cichlidae) have evolved into spectacularly diverse species assemblages, totalling in some cases several hundred to perhaps more than one thousand endemic species in a single lake (Turner et al. 2001). Several features of these species flocks make them particularly susceptible to hybridization, including external fertilization, the sympatric distribution of many closely related species, and dramatic environmental changes promoting isolation and secondary contact of recently diverged species. Indeed several cases of interspecific genetic transfer have been reported in cichlids. These cases range from localized events of gene transfer among species (e.g. Ru ̈ber et al. 2001; Smith et al. 2003), through the replacement of mtDNA of one species by that of another species (e.g. Nyingi & Agne`se 2007), to the origin of new species following hybridization (e.g. Salzburger et al. 2002; Schliewen & Klee 2004). Recently, Koblmu ̈ller et al. (2007) identified a number of likely hybridization events involving species of the tribe Lamprologini from Lake Tanganyika that may have resulted in the creation of new species. These events were pinpointed by incongruence between mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies, and invariably involved species that use empty gastropod shells to breed and guard their fry, and sometimes to gain protection from predators (Sato & Gashagaza 1997). Schelly et al. (2006) and Day et al. (2007) also found evidence suggesting hybridization events in the Lamprologini. All these studies point to an important role for hybridization in the evolutionary history of this tribe.
The Lamprologini is one of the 12–16 tribes described from Lake Tanganyika (Poll 1986; Takahashi 2003; Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2008a), and it is the most species rich, with over 80 described species (Poll 1986; Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2008a). All Lamprologini are substrate spawners, contrary to most other tribes in the lake, and most cichlids present in Lakes Malawi and Victoria, which are mouthbroothers. Although efforts have been made to enlighten the role of hybridization in the evolution of the Lamprologini, most studies conducted to date have included only one or a few specimens of each species (Salzburger et al. 2002; Schelly et al. 2006; Day et al. 2007; Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2007). Such data sets have been important in pinpointing potential cases of hybridization. However, without a phylogeographic perspective,
it is impossible to properly address several important questions regarding hybridization. For example, the circumstances (when or where) under which hybridization is more likely to occur, and whether the presumed episodes of hybridization represent transient events or long-lasting phenomena of interspecific genetic transfer.
In this study, we tackle these questions by analysing lake-wide genetic data (nuclear and mitochondrial) for two lamprologine species suggested by Koblmu ̈ ller et al. (2007) to have been involved in hybridization events, namely Lamprologus callipterus and Neolamprologus fasciatus. We selected these two species for having lake-wide, mostly sympatric distribution ranges and sharing similar breeding strategies with exclusively maternal parental care and with males defending territories that include female harems (Kuwamura 1997). Lamprologus callipterus is an obligatory shell breeder while N. fasciatus is a facultative shell breeder (Sato & Gashagaza 1997). Territorial males of both species are too large to enter the shells and thus release their sperm over the opening of their mates’ shells during spawning. Koblmu ̈ller et al. (2007) inferred incongruent phylogenetic relationships between the two species, with mitochondrial data (ND2) suggesting a close relationship between the two species, while nuclear data (AFLPs) resolved N. fasciatus as the sister species (albeit with low bootstrap support) to a clade containing N. similis and N. multifasciatus and only distantly related to L. callipterus. This finding prompted the authors to suggest a potential role for hybridization in the origin of N. fasciatus, with L. callipterus representing the maternal species, and N. similis or N. multifasciatus candidate paternal species.
Hybrid specimens (when viable and fertile) can become isolated from both parental species and become a new species (hybrid speciation), can mate with either parental species promoting exchange of genetic material between the parental species (introgression) or might fail to reproduce. In the case of hybrid speciation, we would expect N. fasciatus throughout the species’ range to carry a single mtDNA lineage closely related to L. callipterus and a nuclear genome with affinities to both parental species. In the case of introgression, we would expect N. fasciatus to carry mtDNA lineages closely related to sympatric L. callipterus lineages, while maintaining its own nuclear genome. To discern between the alternative hypothesis, we sequenced three mitochondrial (control region, ATP synthase 6 and 8 and cytochrome b) and four nuclear (LSU, ITS, RAG1 intron 2 and RAG1 exon 3) genes from L. callipterus and N. fasciatus throughout the species’ range (to the exclusion of the western shore of the lake, where political instability has prevented sampling for several years). We included most shell-dwelling lamprologine cichlids, as
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4241

4242 B. NEVADO ET AL.
well as species found in previous studies to be closely related phylogenetically to L. callipterus and N. fasciatus (a total of 25 species were analysed). We carried out phylogenetic and phylogeographic analyses on the data collected to elucidate the role of hybridization in the evolution of these two species.
Materials and methods
Sample collection
To have a representative sample of the genetic variability within the study species, we used 105 Lamprologus callipterus specimens collected from 32 localities during six expeditions to Lake Tanganyika (1992, 1995, 1999, 2003, 2006 and 2007) covering the southern and eastern shores of the lake (Fig. 1). For Neolamprologus fasciatus, our data set included 55 samples from 18 localities (collected during the 1992, 1995, 2004 and 2007 expeditions), covering approximately the same geographical range as for L. callipterus. Fin or muscle tissues collected in the field were preserved in 80% ethanol and kept either at room temperature or at )80° (older collections). To properly establish phylogenetic affinities of these two species to the remainder of the Lamprologini tribe, DNA data were also collected from 41 specimens representing 23 different lamprologine species. We tried
to include all shell-dwelling species as well as most species closely related to our target species (cf. Schelly et al. 2006; Day et al. 2007; Koblmu ̈ ller et al. 2007). Most individuals are kept as vouchers at the Royal Museum for Central Africa (Tervuren, Belgium) or at the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (Brussels, Belgium). Table 1 summarizes the DNA data used for each species, while supporting online material (SOM) file 1 contains the identification of all specimens analysed together with locality and voucher information and accession numbers.
DNA extraction and amplification
DNA was extracted from ethanol-preserved tissues using standard protocols (QIAGEN DNeasy kit). Three mitochondrial (control region, ATP synthase 6 and 8 and cytochrome b) and four nuclear (LSU, ITS, RAG1 intron 2 and RAG1 exon 3) genes were amplified. The control region was amplified in all 105 L. callipterus and 55 N. fasciatus to assemble a phylogeographic data set. For the phylogenetic reconstructions, we used the three mitochondrial and four nuclear genes on a subset of L. callipterus and N. fasciatus individuals chosen so as to represent the main clades within each species. PCR protocols for each gene are given in SOM file 2. PCR products were purified using standard protocols (GFX
  L. callipterus
N. fasciatus
Fig. 1 Haplotype networks for the control region haplotypes found in Lamprologus callipterus (left of the lake, north and south clades) and Neolamprologus fasciatus (right of the lake). Coloured circles represent haplotypes, size of the circles represents relative abundance of each haplotype (right bottom scale represents the size of circles for 2, 4 and 6 sequences), colour represents locality of origin. Haplotypes with more than one colour were found in several localities. Localities are represented along the shoreline with a circle (where only L. callipterus was captured), a square (only N. fasciatus) or a circle inside a square (where both species were caught). Within the lake, darker shades of blue represent deeper areas; black lines denote approximate contour of the three sub-basins of the lake which become unconnected following a drop in the water level of >650 m. Black arrow notes the approximate location of the Mahale Mountains, which mark the geographical split between northern and southern clades of L. callipterus.
                                                                North
                                                                                                                                                                                              South
                                                                                50 km
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4243 Table 1 Summary of the number of individuals and genes used for each species
 N.leloupi
N.modestus
N.moorii
N. multifasciatus
N.savoryi
N.similis
N.tetracanthus
N. tretocephalus
Total 199
Control
region (849 bp)
ATP Cytb LSU ITS RAG1 exon 3 (795 bp) (948 bp) (676 bp) (1306 bp) (928 bp)
22212 22212 11110 1 1 1 1 1 22211
2828272825
22222 11111 33321 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 23332 33323 22222 12222 1 1 1 1 1 55545 22222 21222 11111 33333 11111 22222 1 1 1 1 1 11100
72 73 73 67 65
RAG1 intron 2 (828 bp)
2 2 0 1 2
27
2 1 2 2 1 3 3 2 2 1 5 2 2 1 3 1 2 1 0
70
 A.calvus
A. compressiceps
J.ornatus
L.cf.ocellatus
L.attenuatus
L. callipterus
L.elongatus
L.lemairii
L.ocellatus
L.ornatipinnis
L.profundicola
L.signatus
L. sp. ‘meeli-boulengeri’ N.brevis
N.calliurus
N.cunningtoni
N.fasciatus 55
2 2 1 1 2
105
2 1 2 2 1 3 3 1 2 1
2 2 1 3 1 2 1 1
 SOM file 1 contains detailed information about each individual (accession number, locality of capture, voucher identification, etc). Bold lines denote the two focus species in this study.
PCR purification Kit; GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK). Sequencing reactions were performed in both directions (with forward and reverse primers) and run on an ABI 3130XL sequencer following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Phylogeographic analysis
The phylogeographic structure within L. callipterus and N. fasciatus was assessed by constructing haplotype networks for the complete (859 bp) control region of the mtDNA. We analysed a total of 105 L. callipterus and 55 N. fasciatus sequences. Alignment was performed in ClustalW (Thompson et al. 1994) and checked by eye using the program SEAVIEW (Galtier et al. 1996). The program TCS (Clement et al. 2000) was used to construct haplotype networks for the two species. The parsimony criterion (95%) was used to establish the maximum number of mutations between haplotypes belonging to the same network, and gaps were treated as a fifth state. These haplotype networks were then used in a Nested Clade Phylogeographic Analysis (NCPA, Templeton 1998) as implemented in
ANECA v 1.1 (Panchal 2007). In ANECA, one has to define the ‘home range’ for the species under consideration, the geographical coordinates of the sampling locations and the presence ⁄ absence of the studied species in areas where it was not collected. The home range parameter should reflect the approximate movement range of individuals from the point-location where they are caught (cf. ANECA users guide). In the absence of studies providing us with accurate measurement for this parameter for the species under consideration, we used values of 1, 3, 5, 10 and 20 km. This range of values is likely to cover all reasonable scenarios regarding the mobility of L. callipterus and N. fasciatus, from very stenotopic species (home range of 1km) to very mobile species (home range of 20 km). For each value of home range, the analysis was run twice, first assuming that the species does not inhabit areas where it was not collected, and then assuming that it does exist in those areas, but was not caught. Finally, for the analysis including specimens collected from the southern end of the lake (i.e. for L. callipterus southern clade and for N. fasciatus), we used two sets of coordinates for the sampling points: a first analysis was run with
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

4244 B. NEVADO ET AL.
the geographical coordinates directly, such that the distance between sampling points corresponded to the geographical distance, and dispersal between localities was assumed to occur directly (over open water); and a second set of coordinates chosen such that the distance between these corresponded to the distance between localities following the shoreline (representing the more plausible scenario where dispersal between localities follows the shoreline).
Phylogenetic reconstruction
To infer the phylogenetic relationships between L. callipterus and N. fasciatus as well as between these and the remaining Lamprologini, we analysed three mitochondrial (control region, ATP 6 ⁄ 8 and cytochrome b) and four nuclear (LSU, ITS and the intron 2 and exon 3 of RAG1) genes from 74 individuals, including 28 L. callipterus, 5 N. fasciatus and 41 specimens representing 23 Lamprologini species (Table 1).
The control region sequences were aligned with ClustalW and checked by eye afterwards using SEAVIEW. For ATP 6⁄8 and Cytb, alignment was performed by hand as no insertion ⁄ deletion events were detected. The three mtDNA genes were concatenated forming a 2589 bp long data set. Best-fitting models of nucleotide substitution were selected using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC; Akaike 1974) in ModelTest v3.7 (Posada & Crandall 1998) for the control region, and for each codon position of ATP 6 ⁄ 8 and Cytb separately, as well as for the concatenated data set (SOM file 3). Bayesian inference of phylogeny was performed using MrBayes v. 3.1 (Huelsenbeck & Ronquist 2001) by taking into account the seven different partitions (noncoding control region, and each of the codon positions in ATP 6 ⁄ 8 and Cytb). When specific models selected by ModelTest were not implemented in MrBayes, the closest more general model implemented in MrBayes was used. Two Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) runs were performed simultaneously for 10 million generations and trees were sampled every 1000th generation. Convergence of independent runs was checked graphically, by plotting the average distance between the runs and the log likelihood of the trees vs. the generation time. The first 5 million generations of both runs were discarded as burn in, and the remaining 5 million generations (5000 trees) were summarized. Alternative topologies were compared by means of the Shimodaira–Hasegawa test (Shimodaira & Hasegawa 1999) as implemented in PAUP (Sinauer Associates, Inc. Publishers) and with the Bayes factors approach (Kass & Raftery 1995) using the harmonic means of the likelihood throughout different runs (Newton & Raftery 1994).
Best-fitting nucleotide substitution models for each nuclear gene were selected via the AIC in ModelTest (SOM file 3). Bayesian inference of phylogeny was performed in MrBayes for each nuclear gene separately. Two simultaneously runs were performed for each gene with trees sampled every 1000th generation until the standard split frequencies between the two runs reached below 0.01 (the different genes took between three and fifteen million generations to converge). For each gene, half of the trees obtained were discarded as burn in, and the remaining trees were summarized to obtain corresponding gene trees (given in SOM file 4). For the concatenated nuclear data set, Bayesian sampling was carried out in MrBayes with each gene treated as a different partition (for models used for each gene see SOM file 3) and with two independent runs sampled every 1000th generation for 10 million generations. After checking for convergence, the first 5000 trees were discarded as burn in and the remaining 5000 trees were summarized in a 50% majority rule consensus tree.
Age estimates
To convert genetic distances into absolute times of divergence, one needs to calibrate the molecular clock for the gene under analysis. In the absence of reliable fossil information, Sturmbauer et al. (2001) estimated a molecular clock for the first segment of the control region of Lake Tanganyika cichlids based on independent information from Lake Malawi. Geological evidence (Delvaux 1995) suggests that Lake Malawi was almost completely dry for some time between 1 Ma (million years ago) and 570 kya (thousand years ago). Sturmbauer et al. (2001) proposed that the diversification events leading to the present day species diversity of mbuna and non-mbuna (two endemic cichlid groups from Lake Malawi) could not have predated the refilling of the lake, and thus obtained an estimate of 3.25–4.4% per Ma for the substitution rate at the first segment of the control region. Note that these values were incorrect due to a calculation error in Sturmbauer et al. (2001), the actual range should be 3.25–5.7% per Ma (already pointed out in Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2009b). Subsequent studies using this approach yielded estimates of divergence times consensual with known geological, paleolimnological or palaeoclimatological events (e.g. Baric et al. 2003; Verheyen et al. 2003; Sturmbauer et al. 2005).
To estimate the age of particular events in our phylogenetic reconstructions, we used the data set containing the maximum number of individuals, i.e. the complete control region data set. As the molecular clock estimated by Sturmbauer et al. (2001) concerned
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

only the first segment of the control region, the first step in our analysis was to estimate the substitution rate for the complete control region. To do so, we collected complete control region sequences from 17 mbuna and 42 non-mbuna specimens (accession numbers given in SOM file 5). The sequences were aligned in ClustalW and the alignment verified by eye, and subsequently equality of substitution rates between sequences was tested using the median paths length test of Britton et al. (2002) as implemented in APE (Paradis et al. 2004). Average genetic distances between the two groups were then calculated in MEGA4 (Tamura et al. 2007), and using an age of 1 Ma to 570 kya for the onset of diversification we obtained an estimate for the substitution rate of the complete mtDNA control region. The second step involved estimating genetic distances between groups of interest in our phylogeny after testing for equality of substitution rates amongst sequences (using the same test as above), and finally using the newly calculated substitution rate to obtain an estimate for the time of the most recent common ancestor between particular groups in our phylogeny.
A second analysis of the temporal diversification pattern in our data set was performed using the concatenated mtDNA data set (control region, ATP synthase 6 and 8 and cytochrome b). We used the Bayesian method of Thorne et al. (1998) as implemented in the package multidistribute (available at http://statgen. ncsu.edu/thorne/multidivtime.html) and following the guidelines in Rutschmann (2005). PAML v4 (Yang 2007) and estbranches (multidistribute package) were used to estimate branch lengths and parameters of the Felsenstein 84 model (Felsenstein & Churchill 1996) for each mtDNA gene separately using the best topology obtained with MrBayes. MCMC analysis was then performed in multidivtime (multidistribute package). As we cannot calibrate a molecular clock for this data set (no homologous genes are available from Lake Malawi, and no fossils are available to calibrate our tree), we performed this analysis to obtain relative estimates of times of diversification. We performed two short runs of 100 000 burn in steps followed by 25 000 samples taken every 100th generation, and two long runs of 100 000 burn in steps followed by 50 000 samples taken every 100th generation. For the parameters brownmean and brownsd, we used three different values in different runs (0.4 ± 0.4, 0.8 ± 0.8 and 1.2 ± 1.2). Low values of brownmean represent more clock-like trees (with brownmean = 0 the program will use a molecular clock with rates being constant throughout the tree) while higher values allow bigger changes in rate along the tree. All other parameters were kept constant between runs. As all four runs resulted in highly similar trees,
one of the longest runs was used to construct a chronogram (tree where branch lengths are proportional to time).
Recently, Genner et al. (2007) provided alternative age estimates for separation and onset of diversification of several cichlid species flocks. However, these estimates seem to be at odds with several lines of evidence (Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2008a,b). Thus, for the remainder of this study, we will provide age estimates based on the original approach proposed by Sturmbauer et al. (2001).
Results
Phylogeographic analysis
The haplotype network analysis of Lamprologus callipterus resulted in two unconnected networks (Fig. 1, left), with nonoverlapping distribution ranges, with one clade (hereafter referred to as southern clade) occurring from the southernmost end of the lake up to the southern tip of the Mahale Mountains (Fig. 1), and the second clade (northern clade) occurring from the Mahale Mountains up to the northern end of the lake. The distance between the northernmost locality of the southern clade and the southernmost locality of the northern clade was only 􏰁50 km. A single network resulted from the analysis of N. fasciatus sequences (Fig. 1, right).
The northern clade of L. callipterus contained 41 haplotypes (out of 49 sequences analysed), the southern clade 49 haplotypes (56 individuals) and Neolamprologus fasciatus 29 haplotypes (55 specimens analysed). Further phylogeographic subdivision was evident in the southern clade of L. callipterus where three clearly separated groups emerged (see Fig. 1). In N. fasciatus and in the northern clade of L. callipterus, geography-related distribution of haplotypes was evident, although less clearly than in the southern clade of L. callipterus.
The NCPA results were quite robust to the different values assumed for home range, to the existence (or absence) of unsampled areas and to the type of dispersal assumed (Table 2; SOM file 6). For the northern L. callipterus clade, restricted gene flow was suggested as the main force affecting the total cladogram and sub-clades of this lineage. For the southern L. callipterus clade, the outcome was inconclusive, with most sub-clades within this lineage showing traces of restricted gene flow with isolation by distance, with the exception of the sub-clade inhabiting the south-western end of the lake, where a contiguous range expansion was suggested (SOM file 6). For N. fasciatus, all combinations of parameters resulted in inference of a contiguous range expansion for the total cladogram. Sub-clades of N. fasciatus showed signs of isolation by distance, sometimes with long distance dispersal.
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4245

4246 B. NEVADO ET AL.
           Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Table 2 Summary of the results of the NCPA Home range 1 km
3 km Absent
5 km Absent
10 km Absent
20 km
Absent Present
Unsampled areas Absent
Present
Present
Present
Present
Lamprologus callipterus North Total cladogram RGFID
RGFID RGFID
RGFID
Clade4-3 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
Clade 4-2 RGFLDD
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
RGFLDD CRE
Clade 4-1 CRE Lamprologus callipterus South
Total cladogram IO (IO)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
IO (IO) LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
Clade 5-2 LDC ⁄ PF (RGFID)
RGFID
RGFID
RGFID
RGFID
RGFID
RGFID
Clade5-1 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
Neolamprologus fasciatus
Total cladogram Clade 3-4 Clade 3-3 Clade 3-2 Clade 3-1
CRE (CRE) RGFID (RGFID) NR (NR) RGFID (RGFLDD) NR (NR)
CRE (CRE) RGFID (RGFID) NR (NR) IO (RGFID) NR (NR)
CRE (CRE) RGFID (RGFID) NR (NR) RGFLDD (RGFLDD) NR (NR)
CRE (CRE) RGFID (RGFID) NR (NR) RGFLDD (RGFLDD) NR (NR)
CRE (CRE) RGFID (RGFID) NR (NR) RGFLDD (RGFLDD) NR (NR)
(NR)
(NR)
(NR) (NR)
(NR) (NR)
(NR) (NR)
(NR) (NR)
Analyses were performed for Neolamprologus fasciatus and for each of the two lineages of Lamprologus callipterus (north ⁄ south) separately. Shown are the results obtained on each analysis for the total cladogram as well as for the higher-level sub-clades within each group. We considered five different values of home range (1, 3, 5, 10 and 20 km), and for each of these we performed the analysis twice, once assuming that unsampled areas were uninhabited by the species under consideration, and another assuming the species exists there but was not caught (for N. fasciatus no uninhabited areas were considered because there were no long unsampled stretches of shoreline for this species). Values in parenthesis represent results obtained when using false geographical coordinates for the sampling points, such that distance between localities represents shoreline distance (for the northern L. callipterus, this analysis was not performed because shoreline and direct distances are very similar). SOM file 6 contains more details on this analysis (including the nested designs for each group and the results for lower-level sub-clades). Codes used for outcome of analysis: NR – null hypothesis (of no geographical distribution of haplotypes), not rejected; IO, inconclusive outcome; RGFID, restricted gene flow with isolation by distance; RGFLDD, restricted gene flow ⁄ dispersal but with some long-distance dispersal over intermediate areas not occupied by the species, or past gene flow followed by extinction of intermediate populations; CRE, contiguous range expansion; LDC ⁄ PF, long-distance colonization and ⁄ or past fragmentation (not necessarily mutually exclusive).

Phylogenetic reconstruction
mtDNA phylogeny. Summary statistics for mitochondrial genes used for phylogenetic reconstruction are depicted in Table 3. The phylogenetic reconstruction based on the three mtDNA genes showed that all N. fasciatus individuals analysed fall into a monophyletic cluster closely related to the L. callipterus northern clade. This association is very strongly supported, with PP (posterior probability) of 1 (Fig. 2, left). The low support found for the node connecting the L. callipterus southern clade to the N. fasciatus and L. callipterus northern clade (PP of 0.72) should not be taken as an indication of reduced support for the branching of the two groups, but instead reflects the uncertainty in the phylogenetic assignment of the closest related species (L. cf. ocellatus, represented by only 1 specimen which was erroneously identified as N. wauthioni in Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2007). Given the amount of data collected, it seems likely that the events leading to the mtDNA phylogenetic relationships between these groups (the two L. callipterus clades, N. fasciatus and L. cf. ocellatus) occurred contemporaneously or in quick succession.
To evaluate the support for the nonmonophyly of L. callipterus, we used the Shimodaira–Hasegawa test and the Bayes factors approach. To do so, a second Bayesian sampling was performed with the same parameters as before, but constraining all L. callipterus individuals to form a monophyletic cluster. The resulting tree was compared with the best unconstrained tree obtained previously. The Shimodaira–Hasegawa test returned a marginally significant value as judged by the full optimization method (ln L )13 977 vs. )13 997, P = 0.041), while the Bayes factors resulted in neither of the topologies being strongly supported (harmonic means of marginal likelihoods )13 560 vs. )13 582, 2 · log B10 = 0.0032).
Nuclear phylogeny. Summary statistics describing each nuclear gene used for phylogenetic reconstruction are depicted in Table 3. The single gene analyses invariably produced very unresolved trees, with most branches being only weakly supported (SOM file 4). Most nodes recovered with the concatenated nuclear data set (Fig. 2, right) where either absent or weakly supported in the single gene analyses (Table 4). However, every separate gene tree consistently grouped all L. callipterus individuals separately from all N. fasciatus (even though each species often shared haplotypes with other lamprologines). Moreover, none of the nuclear genes analysed revealed a north-south sub division within L. callipterus. The tree based on the concatenated nuclear data set (Fig. 2, right) is thus remarkably different from the one obtained with the three mtDNA genes (Fig. 2, left): Lamprologus callipterus constitutes a strongly supported monophyletic clade, and so does N. fasciatus. Also sister group relationships are different from the ones inferred from mtDNA, in placing L. callipterus as the sister group to the Lepidiolamprologus genus, followed by a clade containing Lamprologus lemairii and Neolamprologus leloupi. The genus Altolamprologus and the species L. ocellatus, which in the mtDNA are the closest relatives to the clade containing L. callipterus and N. fasciatus, are now placed outside the L. callipterus + Lepidiolamprologus + N. leloupi + L. lemairii clade.
Age estimates
To estimate the age of separation of the two L. callipterus clades as well as the separation between these and N. fasciatus, we used the complete control region data set, comprising 105 L. callipterus and 55 N. fasciatus individuals. The Median Path Lengths method showed that a single node significantly deviated from the
Table 3 Summary statistics for each of NHaplo
DLOOP 66 ATP 55 Cytb 59 LSU 8 RAG1-intron2 27 RAG1-exon3 26 ITS 19
the genes used in this study
MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4247
NHaplo-Lc
90 (105) 18 (28) 20 (28)
2 (27) 2 (27) 8 (25) 2 (28)
NHaplo-Nf SS
29 (55) 208 4 (5) 203 4 (5) 230 2 (5) 6 3 (5) 18 1 (5) 23 1 (4) 28
K
molecular clock
hypothesis (P = 0.047)
HaploDiv Pi
0.996 0.0538 0.989 0.0479 0.989 0.0429 0.585 0.0011 0.827 0.0035 0.619 0.0018 0.814 0.0028
in
the
tree
38.962 33.782 38.351
0.709 2.308 1.528 3.455
   NHaplo, number of haplotypes (total); NHaplo-Lc, number of haplotypes found
individuals sequenced); NHaplo-Nf, number of haplotypes found in Neolamprologus fasciatus (in parenthesis number of individuals sequenced); SS, number of segregating sites; HaploDiv, haplotype diversity; Pi, nucleotide diversity; K, average number of pairwise differences; SS, HaploDiv, Pi and K calculated in DNASP v5 (Librado & Rozas 2009) after removing sequences with more than onethird of the sites containing missing data. NHaplo estimated with program TCS treating gaps as missing data.
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
in Lamprologus callipterus (in parenthesis number of

4248 B. NEVADO ET AL.
 Neolamprologus moorii Neolamprologus modestus
Neolamprologus modestus Julidochromis ornatus
Neolamprologus cunningtoni Neolamprologus tetracanthus
Neolamprologus tretocephalus Neolamprologus savoryi
Lamprologus ornatipinnis Lamprologus signatus
Neolamprologus calliurus Neolamprologus brevis
Neolamprologus similis
Neolamprologus multifasciatus
Lamprologus lemairii Neolamprologus leloupi Lepidiolamprologus profundicola
Lepidiolamprologus elongatus Lepidiolamprologus attenuatus
Lepidiolamprologus sp “meeli-boulengeri” Lamprologus ocellatus
Altolamprologus calvus Altolamprologus calvus
Altolamprologus compressiceps Lamprologus cf ocellatus
Lamprologus callipterus South
Neolamprologus fasciatus
Lamprologus callipterus North
Mitochondrial
Neolamprologus moorii Neolamprologus tretocephalus
Neolamprologus savoryi Neolamprologus tetracanthus
Julidochromis ornatus Neolamprologus cunningtoni
Neolamprologus modestus Lamprologus ornatipinnis
Lamprologus signatus
Neolamprologus calliurus Neolamprologus brevis
Neolamprologus brevis Neolamprologus calliurus
                         Neolamprologus similis Neolamprologus multifasciatus
Lamprologus ocellatus
Lamprologus ocellatus Altolamprologus calvus Altolamprologus compressiceps
Altolamprologus calvus Altolamprologus compressiceps
A B C
D2
D
E1
                    Lamprologus cf ocellatus Neolamprologus fasciatus
Neolamprologus leloupi
D1
          Lamprologus lemairii Lepidiolamprologus sp “meeli-boulengeri”
Lepidiolamprologus attenuatus Lepidiolamprologus elongatus
     Lepidiolamprologus sp “meeli-boulengeri” E21 Lepidiolamprologus sp “meeli-boulengeri”
     Lepidiolamprologus attenuatus Lepidiolamprologus elongatus
Lepidiolamprologus profundicola
E
E2
        Lamprologus callipterus
Nuclear
E22
          0.1
0.001
Fig. 2 Phylogenetic reconstructions obtained in this study. Left: using the three mitochondrial genes (control region, ATP synthase 6 and 8 and cytochrome b); right: using the four nuclear genes (LSU, ITS, RAG1 intron 2 and RAG1 exon 3). Both trees were obtained using MrBayes and taking into account different partitions for each gene (for cytochrome b and ATP synthase different codon positions were also treated separately). Numbers next to nodes indicate posterior probabilities of corresponding clades. Grey rectangles highlight the incongruent phylogenetic placement of Neolamprologus fasciatus in the mitochondrial and nuclear trees. Letters next to branches refer to labelling used in Table 4.
including L. callipterus and N. fasciatus (tree not shown). In the tree containing the mbuna and non-mbuna from Lake Malawi, no nodes were found to deviate from the molecular clock hypothesis. Between mbuna and nonmbuna, an average genetic distance (K2P, Kimura 1980) of 3.55% was found. Assuming that the refilling of Lake
Malawi occurred between 1 Ma and 570 kya, we get an estimate for the molecular clock of the complete control region for East African cichlids of 1.78% (slow rate) to 3.11% (fast rate) per million years. This rate is similar to the estimates obtained for other fish species (e.g. Donaldson & Wilson 1999; Burridge et al. 2008). The
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4249 Table 4 Comparison of the topologies obtained with the concatenated nuclear data (ITS, LSU, RAG1 intron 2, RAG1 exon 3) and
with each nuclear gene separately A B
C D
*** * * nr nr * * nr nr nr
E D1 D2 * *** *
nr * nr nr nr nr nr *** nr nr ** nr
E1 E2 E21 E22 * *** *** ***
nr nr nr nr nr * * nr nr nr nr ** nr nr nr nr
  Concatenated ITS
LSU RAG1intron2 RAG1exon3
*** *** ** * nr nr *** * nr nr
 Names of nodes are the ones represented in Fig. 2, right. Columns in bold denote nodes corresponding to the monophyly of Neolamprologus fasciatus (D1) and Lamprologus callipterus (E22).
nr, node not recovered in the single gene analysis. ***Node recovered with P ‡ 0.99; **node recovered with P ‡ 0.95; *node recovered with P £ 0.95.
substitution rate of ATP and Cytb genes used in this study (approximated by estimating the ratio of control region distance to ATP or Cytb distances between all pairs of individuals for which all three genes are available) is also similar to this rate, with observed values of 1.36–2.37% (ATP) and 1.32–2.31% (Cytb).
Average genetic distances (K2P) between the two L. callipterus clades, and between these clades and N. fasciatus are shown in Table 5, as well as the inferred times to the most recent common ancestors of these groups. Standard deviations of average genetic distances were estimated in MEGA4 using 1000 bootstrap replicates. Separation of the two L. callipterus would have occurred 684 ± 95 to 1200 ± 167 kya, and between N. fasciatus and the northern clade of L. callipterus between 586 ± 95 and 1208 ± 167 kya (these intervals reflect the uncertainty in the date of refilling of Lake Malawi). Within group, average distances were comparable between northern L. callipterus and N. fasciatus (0.79% and 0.86%, with an observed maximum of 2% and 1.9% respectively), but were higher in the southern L. callipterus clade (1.10% with a maximum of 2.5%).
The chronogram based on the concatenated mtDNA data set (Fig. 3) suggests a simultaneous onset of diversification in several clades, namely in the two mtDNA clades of L. callipterus, in N. fasciatus, and possibly in Altolamprologus sp. Due to the absence of homologous
sequences from Lake Malawi, we were unable to calibrate a clock for the chronogram obtained. However, using the above estimated age for the divergence of the two mtDNA clades of L. callipterus (684 kya to 1.2 Ma), we tentatively estimate the period of initial diversification within these clades at 211–269 kya (using the fast rate) or 372–472 kya (slow rate). Accordingly, the N. fasciatus–L. callipterus northern clade divergence would date back to 537 kya (fast rate) to 944 kya (slow rate).
Discussion
This study detected two very divergent mtDNA lineages (control region sequence divergence of 4% K2P) within Lamprologus callipterus. These two lineages have disjunct distribution ranges, with one lineage occupying the northern half, and the other the southern half of Lake Tanganyika. Conversely, all Neolamprologus fasciatus individuals analysed, distributed across approximately the same geographical range as L. callipterus, exhibited a single mtDNA lineage with an average genetic distance of 0.8%. Further, in our phylogenetic reconstruction, the mtDNA lineage found in N. fasciatus was resolved as the sister group to the northern lineage of L. callipterus, making the latter species paraphyletic. It should be noted, however, that the alternative topology where the two clades of L. callipterus are sister groups
Table 5 Average genetic distances and standard deviations (Kimura-2-parameter) estimated in MEGA4 within each group and between groups
  Lamprologus callipterus South Lamprologus callipterus North Neolamprologus fasciatus
Within
0.011 ± 0.002 0.0079 ± 0.001 0.0086 ± 0.002
Lamprologus callipterus South —
0.043 ± 0.006 (684 ± 95–1200 ± 167) 0.047 ± 0.007 (782 ± 116–1370 ± 204)
Lamprologus callipterus North —
0.037 ± 0.006 (586 ± 95–1028 ± 167)
 Standard deviations calculated using 1000 bootstrap replicates. Values given in parenthesis represent estimated ages for the time to the most recent common ancestors between the three groups (in thousands of years). Dates are given as an interval reflecting the uncertainty in the age of refilling of Lake Malawi (cf. Results and Discussion).
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

4250 B. NEVADO ET AL.
  Lamprologus ornatipinnis Lamprologus signatus
Neolamprologus calliurus Neolamprologus brevis Neolamprologus similis
Neolamprologus multifasciatus
Lamprologus lemairii Neolamprologus leloupi Lepidiolamprologus profundicola Lepidiolamprologus elongatus
Lepidiolamprologus attenuatus Lepidiolamprologus sp “meeli-boulengeri”
Lamprologus ocellatus
Altolamprologus calvus Altolamprologus calvus Altolamprologus compressiceps
Lamprologus cf ocellatus
Lamprologus callipterus South
Neolamprologus fasciatus
Lamprologus callipterus North
Fig. 3 Chronogram obtained using the software multidivtime, applied to the mitochondrial DNA data set (ATP 6⁄8, cytochrome b and control region). Only the ingroup is represented. Grey rectangle highlights a period of increased cladogenesis in Lamprologus callipterus, Neolamprologus fasciatus and Altolamprologus sp. Each interval on the time axis below the tree represents 250 thousand years when using either the fast (above) or the slow (below) rate estimated in this study to calibrate the split between northern and southern L. callipterus. Horizontal grey bars on nodes leading to L. callipterus and N. fasciatus represent standard deviations for age of these nodes obtained in multidivtime.
                     Fast Slow
2 Mya
1 Mya
1.5 Mya
500 Kya
1 Mya
500 Kya
 (to the exclusion of N. fasciatus) could not (Bayes factors) or could only marginally (Shimodaira–Hasegawa test) be rejected.
The nuclear genes analysed, on the other hand, resulted in reciprocal monophyly of both species, and placed L. callipterus as the sister group to the genus Lepidiolamprologus and relatively distantly related to N. fasciatus. Conflicting mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies are often taken as an indication of recent speciation with associated incomplete lineage sorting, or hinting at episodes of interspecific gene transfer (e.g. Moore 1995; Beltra ́n et al. 2002; Egger et al. 2007). Lamprologus callipterus and N. fasciatus seem to have had a long separate evolutionary history, as suggested by the complete lineage sorting observed at the (slowly evolving) nuclear genes and by the closer relationship of L. callipterus to the genus Lepidiolamprologus than to N. fasciatus. We can thus discard the hypothesis of incomplete lineage sorting as the explanation for the incongruence reported here, and instead interpret our
data as supporting an episode of unidirectional mtDNA transfer between the northern clade of L. callipterus and N. fasciatus. Our phylogenetic reconstruction suggests that introgression occurred from L. callipterus into N. fasciatus, and not the inverse (if mtDNA introgression had proceeded from N. fasciatus into L. callipterus, the mtDNA lineage found in the L. callipterus northern clade would not be the sister group to the southern L. callipterus, but instead be outside the L. callipterus, Lepidiolamprologus spp. and N. leloupi ⁄ L. lemairii clade). Furthermore, our results suggest that mtDNA transfer occurred contemporaneously with the onset of divergence of the two mtDNA clades of L. callipterus, or soon after it, which explains the low statistical support found for alternative topologies concerning the possible relationships between the two clades of L. callipterus and N. fasciatus.
A chance for accidental hybridization is suggested by the breeding behaviour of the two targeted species: L. callipterus males monopolize many gastropod shells and
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

carry these shells (as well as any species inhabiting them) to their nest, in this way forming multi-species communities with one dominating L. callipterus male. Furthermore, L. callipterus nests are actively colonized by other shell-breeding species in habitats where empty gastropod shells are otherwise scarce. As both L. callipterus and N. fasciatus males are too big to enter these shells, they release their sperm over the opening of the shell where the female is laying her eggs. With wave action or water currents, sperm can then be carried to neighbouring shells where females of other species are spawning (Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2007). It should be noted that as all lamprologine species are substrate breeders, accidental hybridization is certainly more likely in this cichlid tribe than in Lake Tanganyika’s mouthbrooding cichlid tribes. And among the lamprologines, shell-breeding species – like L. callipterus and N. fasciatus – seem to be particularly prone to hybridization (Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2007). While the above-mentioned scenario could explain how the hybridization between these two species occurred, it does not explain the observed unidirectional introgression of mtDNA from L. callipterus into N. fasciatus.
Interestingly, none of our a priori hypotheses concerning the hybridization pattern between L. callipterus and N. fasciatus is able to fully explain the observed relationships. Although most representatives of the lamprologine clade comprising the majority of shell-dwelling species have been included in this study, we did not find the hypothesized paternal species of a putative hybrid speciation event. It should be noted that, although we consider it unlikely, we cannot completely rule out the hypothesis that hybridization occurred between L. callipterus and a distantly related lamprologine species not included in this study, nor can the hypothesis of a now-extinct paternal species (see, e.g. Schelly et al. 2006) be discarded. However, our results do rule out N. similis and N. multifasciatus as the likely paternal species, and pending further data suggest that N. fasciatus is not a hybrid species. The phylogenetic and phylogeographic patterns reported herein more likely support the hypothesis of introgression of mtDNA from L. callipterus into N. fasciatus. However, our results do not conform to the expectations of frequent or repeated introgression, i.e. that sympatric populations of the two species would share more closely related haplotypes than allopatric populations of each species. Instead, they suggest that a single, or relatively small number of contemporaneous ancient hybridization events followed by introgression of mtDNA from L. callipterus into N. fasciatus resulted in the complete replacement of the mtDNA of the latter species. That we found no trace of introgression of nuclear DNA might be due to the low number of nuclear genes and individuals analysed (28
L. callipterus and 5 N. fasciatus were sequenced for the four nuclear genes used in this study) together with the long time passed since hybridization: repeated backcrossing of hybrid progeny with N. fasciatus likely resulted in most traces of L. callipterus nuclear DNA being lost.
Phylogeographic patterns
In this study, we focused on two lamprologini cichlid species, L. callipterus and N. fasciatus, which share several life history characteristics (such as territoriality of males, polygynous mating systems, exclusive maternal brood care and shell breeding – exclusive or facultative) and are sympatric through most of their distribution range. It is thus remarkable that these two species show very different phylogeographic structures. Neolamprologus fasciatus individuals sampled across 􏰁600 km of shoreline exhibit an average genetic distance of 0.79% (K2P), and NCPA suggests a contiguous range expansion in this species. The shallow phylogeographic pattern of the mtDNA haplotype network of N. fasciatus (Fig. 1) further supports the idea of a rapid expansion through this species’ distribution range. Conversely, L. callipterus individuals sampled across a similar distribution range belong to one of two very divergent (4% K2P) mtDNA clades. The two clades were never found in sympatry, even though the extremes of the distribution ranges of the two clades are only approximately 50 km apart. Within the two mtDNA clades, average genetic distances of 1.1% (southern clade) and 0.86% (northern clade) were found, and NCPA suggests restricted gene flow with isolation by distance as major driving force in the geographical distribution of haplotypes for most sub-clades. The two mtDNA clades were resolved in different haplotype networks when using the parsimony criterion (Fig. 1) and geography-related distribution of haplotypes is particularly evident in the southern L. callipterus clade.
The geological history of Lake Tanganyika includes several episodes of severe water level fluctuations. It is estimated that the lake started to form c. 9–12 Ma, initially consisting of swampy proto lakes, which gradually fused to form a single basin c. 5–6 Ma (Tiercelin & Mondeguer 1991; Cohen et al. 1993). A change to a drier climate in the late Pliocene ⁄ early Pleistocene, possibly coupled with tectonic activity, resulted in a major water level low stand (650 or 700 m below present level) c. 1.1 Ma, after which the water level rose again attaining the present level c. 550 kya (Lezzar et al. 1996; Cohen et al. 1997). Subsequent water level fluctuations are recorded at 390–360, 290–260 and 190–170 kya, with water level reaching 250–350 m below present level during these three periods (Cohen et al. 1997). More recent (<50 kya) water level fluctuations have been
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4251

4252 B. NEVADO ET AL.
identified, but precise timing and extent of these changes remains contentious (Gasse et al. 1989; Lezzar et al. 1996; Cohen et al. 1997; Scholz et al. 2003). Given the structure of Lake Tanganyika’s basin, a drop of >600 m below present water level should result in three isolated sub-basins (Fig. 1).
Our estimate for the age of divergence of the two mtDNA clades of L. callipterus (684 kya to 1.2 Ma), obtained using an independent calibration from Lake Malawi, suggests that initial separation of the two clades occurred during the period of major regression in water level between 1.1 Ma and 550 kya. It thus seems likely that divergence of the two mtDNA clades occurred in allopatry following the isolation of L. callipterus populations into different sub-basins. The fact that we found two (instead of three) mtDNA clades, distributed approximately across the northern and southern subbasins, suggests that L. callipterus’ populations in the central basin went extinct during the lake level low stand, or that the central sub-basin was never completely isolated from either northern or southern sub-basins (or not long enough to leave detectable traces on this species). Amongst the few other detailed phylogeographic studies of Lake Tanganyika cichlids, Ru ̈ber et al. (1999) reported on the existence of a similar pattern in Eretmodus cyanostictus (south sub-basin) and Eretmodus cf. cyanostictus (north sub-basin), with two mtDNA clades with an almost geographically exclusive northsouth distribution range. The distribution limits of the two clades are not exactly the same as in L. callipterus (Ru ̈ber et al. 1999; Fig. 3). However, the average genetic distance of the two clades of E. cyanostictus (10% K2P on the first segment of the control region) translates into an age of 500–877 kya (using the calibration of Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2009b) and thus suggests that the divergence of the two Eretmodus clades occurred during the same period of low water level stand as in L. callipterus.
The mtDNA differentiation uncovered in L. callipterus is not mirrored in the nuclear genes analysed, where individuals from throughout the lake share identical or closely related haplotypes. Similarly, a morphological analysis of L. callipterus using 11 meristic and 19 morphometric characters revealed that individuals from the two mtDNA clades are highly similar and cannot be separated by habitus or meristics (data not shown). This suggests that mtDNA in L. callipterus does not reflect species relationships but past demographical and phylogeographic events.
On the hybridization between L. callipterus and N. fasciatus
Our data suggest that the incongruent placement of our two targeted species in the nuclear and mitochondrial
phylogenies results from an ancient unidirectional introgression of mtDNA from L. callipterus northern clade into N. fasciatus. Our analysis further suggests that the hybridization event took place contemporaneously with or soon after the separation of the two clades of L. callipterus (i.e. during the major water level regression from 1.1 Ma to 550 kya).
Hybridization between cichlid species has been shown to occur under both natural (e.g. Ru ̈ber et al. 2001; Salzburger et al. 2002; Koblmu ̈ller et al. 2007) and laboratory conditions (e.g. Stelkens et al. 2008; Van der Sluijs et al. 2008), and given the close proximity in which L. callipterus and N. fasciatus breed, accidental interspecific fertilization of eggs seems plausible. However, that such accidental hybridization would result in the complete mtDNA replacement in N. fasciatus is very surprising. A similar case of unidirectional mtDNA introgression in cichlids was recently reported by Nyingi & Agne`se (2007) involving two Oreochromis species of Lake Baringo. However, important differences exist between the case reported by Nyingi & Agne`se (2007) and our own study. Nyingi & Agne`se (2007) suggest that the detected mtDNA introgression in Oreochromis niloticus occurred following the anthropogenic introduction of an alien species (O. leucostictus) into Lake Baringo in the past decades. Conversely, L. callipterus and N. fasciatus hybridization is much older (500 kya to 1 Ma), did not result from anthropogenic action and involved two species that coexisted in sympatry before the hybridization event. Furthermore, contrary to the study of Nyingi & Agne`se (2007), we found no trace of the original mtDNA of N. fasciatus (taking into account the extensive geographical survey in our study, this likely means that a complete mtDNA replacement took place following the original hybridization event). Lastly, the two studies cover very different geographical extensions: Lake Baringo is a shallow basin with a diameter of 􏰁3 km (Nyingi & Agne`se 2007), while even the isolated northern sub-basin of Lake Tanganyika, during a water level regression of 􏰁600 m below present level, would consist of a lake with several hundred kilometres of shoreline. Whether the mechanisms responsible for the observed mtDNA replacement in our and Nyingi & Agne`se’s (2007) studies are different remains to be tested. However, while in O. niloticus, random genetic drift could have a strong effect given the low population sizes (due both to the small size of the lake and to increased fishing pressure, cf. Nyingi & Agne`se 2007), we do not think such process could have resulted in the complete replacement of N. fasciatus mtDNA by the invading L. callipterus lineage, even if subdivision of N. fasciatus populations would result in lower effective population sizes (Whitlock & Barton 1997). Instead, our results hint at a
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

selective sweep, whereby the invading mtDNA from L. callipterus reached fixation in N. fasciatus. This scenario is also supported by the results of the NCPA, which suggest a rapid expansion of mtDNA haplotypes throughout N. fasciatus distribution range. Theoretically, such an event could be due to selection acting directly upon mtDNA, to indirect selection (e.g. through cytonuclear interactions), or to the accumulation of deleterious mutations on the original mtDNA genome of N. fasciatus (for a review of these processes, see e.g. Ballard & Whitlock 2004).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank C. Poux, M. Virgilio and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on previous versions of this manuscript. P. Ngalande and the team at the Mpulungu Station of the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Republic of Zambia and B. Ngatunga (Tanzanian Fisheries Research Institute) are acknowledged for their support to obtain the Research permits and their assistance in the field. We are further grateful to K. West for providing samples from Burundi, and H. Bu ̈scher for pointing out the misidentification of L. cf. ocellatus as N. wauthioni in previous studies. Most fishes were collected during different expeditions to Lake Tanganyika that were financed by the Austrian Science Foundation (2003, 2004, 2005) and the Belgian Science Policy (1992, 1995, 2006 and 2007, the two last in the context of the ESF project MOLARCH) with support of the Leopold III Foundation for Nature Research and Nature Conservation. Bruno Nevado is supported by PhD grant SFRH ⁄ BD ⁄ 17704 ⁄ 2004 from the Fundac ̧a ̃o para a Cieˆncia e Tecnologia. During his stay at the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences Jaime UsanoAlemany was supported by the ‘ARGO Project’ financed by the European Mobility Program Leonardo da Vinci and the Ministerio de Educacio ́n y Ciencia de Espan ̃a.
References
Ó 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
MTDNA REPLACEMENT IN A TANGANYIKAN CICHLID FISH 4253
