  Quantifying morphological change during an evolutionary radiation of Devonian trilobites
Author(s) :Francine R. Abe and Bruce S. Lieberman Source: Paleobiology, 38(2):292-307. 2012. Published By: The Paleontological Society
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1666/10047.1
URL: http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1666/10047.1
BioOne (www.bioone.org) is a nonprofit, online aggregation of core research in the biological, ecological, and environmental sciences. BioOne provides a sustainable online platform for over 170 journals and books published by nonprofit societies, associations, museums, institutions, and presses.
Your use of this PDF, the BioOne Web site, and all posted and associated content indicates your acceptance of BioOne’s Terms of Use, available at www.bioone.org/page/ terms_of_use.
Usage of BioOne content is strictly limited to personal, educational, and non-commercial use. Commercial inquiries or rights and permissions requests should be directed to the individual publisher as copyright holder.
       BioOne sees sustainable scholarly publishing as an inherently collaborative enterprise connecting authors, nonprofit publishers, academic institutions, research libraries, and research funders in the common goal of maximizing access to critical research.

Paleobiology, 38(2), 2012, pp. 292–307
Quantifying morphological change during an evolutionary radiation of Devonian trilobites
Francine R. Abe and Bruce S. Lieberman
Abstract.—The fossil record provides an important source of data on adaptive radiations, and indeed some of the earliest theoretical insights on the nature of these radiations were made by paleontologists. Here we focus on the diverse Devonian Metacryphaeus group calmoniid trilobites, known from the Malvinokaffric Realm, which have been considered a classic example of an adaptive radiation preserved in the fossil record. We use a geometric morphometric analysis in conjunction with phylogenetic and biogeographic patterns and data on speciation rates. Using ancestral character state reconstruction during speciation events, we quantify patterns of morphological change in order to assess the role ecological and geographical factors may have played in mediating this radiation. We found no significant differences between the amount of morphological change that occurred during speciation events when ancestors and descendants were in the same area as opposed to when they occupied different areas. Further, the magnitude of morphological divergence did not change through time or with cladogenetic rank. These patterns, in conjunction with the fact that the radiation occurs in a geographically heterogeneous region subjected to repeated episodes of sea-level rise and fall, suggest that at the macroevolutionary scale this radiation may have been motivated more by phenomena that facilitated geographic isolation than by competition.
Francine R. Abe. Natural History Museum/Biodiversity Institute and Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045. E-mail: fabe@ku.edu
Bruce S. Lieberman. Natural History Museum/Biodiversity Institute and Department of Geology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045
Accepted: 5 July 2011
Introduction
Numerous evolutionary radiations are preserved in the fossil record, and indeed, many of the early theoretical considerations, specifically in the context of adaptive radiations, were based on studies of the fossil record (e.g., Osborn 1902; Simpson 1944). Hypotheses about such evolutionary radiations have largely focused on how ecological mechanisms could cause the rapid speciation events. These hypotheses examined the potential role of ecological factors in causing speciation and are the foundation for many mechanistic explanations of adaptive radiations (Schluter 2000). The prevailing model for adaptive radiation requires open ecological opportunities that allow species (and sometimes, it has been argued, even higher taxa) to occupy empty and new niches and subsequently proliferate (Simpson 1953; Schluter 2000; Phillimore and Price 2008; Yoder et al. 2010). This mechanism has been invoked to explain evolutionary radiations as small as the 15 species of Darwin’s finches (Lack 1947; Grant and Grant 2007) and as large as the
Cambrian radiation (Bambach et al. 2007). The difficulty in understanding the processes behind adaptive radiations may be a result of lack of description of the patterns. This is evident in that we still have difficulty in discerning whether ‘‘adaptive radiations’’ are in fact evolutionary process phenomena or merely a poorly delimited pattern (Olson and Arroyo-Santos 2009). The fossil record offers a unique perspective on patterns through time that can be used to examine possible factors behind evolutionary radiations.
Much debate on the adaptive character of evolutionary radiations has focused on the correlation between morphology and ecological roles (Schluter 2000). Thus, extensive tests of phenotype-environment correlation have been applied; for instance, beak size is correlated with choice of seed type in Darwin’s finches (Grant 1999), leg lengths and coloration of Anolis lizards are associated with habitat (Irschick and Losos 1998; Losos et al. 1998, 2006), and cichlid jaw morphology matches trophic groups (Clabaut et al. 2007). Such ecologically driven speciation would be
’ 2012 The Paleontological Society. All rights reserved.
0094-8373/12/3802–0007/$1.00

MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 293
               FIGURE 1. Models with branching topology (on the top) and predicted rate of morphological change and exponential diversity curves (on the bottom). On the bottom, dashed lines denote morphological change and solid lines show diversity. A, Rapid early morphological diversification followed by stable or decreasing morphological change. B, Morphological change constant over the diversification of the clade. C, Morphological change increasing during diversification. Modified from Foote (1993), although in that publication disparity curves were shown.
expected to generate identifiable patterns of morphological diversification, and the fossil record provides excellent opportunities to study patterns of morphological change during evolutionary radiations as they play out through macroevolutionary time scales (e.g., Foote 1993, 1997; Wagner 1995, 2000; Zelditch and Fink 1996; Smith and Lieberman 1999; Wagner and Erwin 2006). Here we consider patterns of morphological change during the radiation of the Devonian calmoniid (Calmoniidae: Phacopida) trilobites; this group has been hailed as a classic example of an evolutionary radiation in the fossil record (Eldredge and Cracraft 1980; Fortey and Owens 1990; Lieberman 1993). We specifically focus on the monophyletic Metacryphaeus group within this clade; it consists of more than 40 species that diversified rapidly into myriad morphological forms, even at a time when global trilobite diversity was waning (Eldredge and Cracraft 1980). They occurred in the cooler southern waters of the Malvinokaffric Realm, which was a geographically complex region that possessed high endemicity (Eldredge and Ormiston 1979). The rapid diversification of the group was mediated by high initial speciation rates coupled with low to moderate extinction rates; an abrupt decrease of speciation rates in the face of moderate extinction rates caused the eventual
demise of the group, coincident with the Late Devonian biodiversity crisis (Abe and Lieberman 2009; see also McGhee 1996; Rode and Lieberman 2004). Our study considers the tempo of this radiation and how rates of speciation, extinction, and morphological change are associated with various abiotic and biotic factors including biogeography, paleoenvironment, and ecological association. Using a phylogenetic framework, we take a geometric morphometric approach to quantify morphological change throughout the evolutionary radiation.
A pattern of rapid initial morphological diversification that subsequently declines has been the traditional view of morphological evolution during an adaptive radiation (Fig. 1A) (Foote 1993, 1997). One possible interpretation of such a pattern is that early morphological diversification is associated with initial rampant ecological opportunities (early-burst model of evolutionary radiations), followed by a decrease in morphological diversification as the available ecological niches are filled. ‘‘Key innovations’’ (sensu Simpson 1953) might be associated with such a pattern as the acquisition of a trait would allow invasion into new ecological space. This pattern has not been supported in a comprehensive study coupling molecular phylogenetics and likelihood models with

294 FRANCINE R. ABE AND BRUCE S. LIEBERMAN
simple morphological measurements of extant radiations, including the classical examples of adaptive radiations (Harmon et al. 2010). In another model of morphological diversification driven by ecology, there is a change from a generalist form to specialized (stenotopic) forms (Eldredge and Cracraft 1980). Specialization due to ecological processes could yield early morphological change (Fig. 1A) or increasing ecological divergence into specialized roles (Fig. 1C).
Quantitative analyses of the morphology of taxa during evolutionary radiations have focused mainly on indices of disparity (Foote 1993, 1997; Erwin 2007), which measure occupation of morphospace at a given time. Some analyses also consider phylogenetic relationships to measure disparity differences between and within clades (Clabaut et al. [2007] for cichlid fishes; Harmon et al. 2003 for iguanid lizards) or between cladogenetic events (Wagner 1995 for rostroconch mollusks; Smith and Lieberman 1999 for olenelloid trilobites; see also Harmon et al. 2003). Indices of disparity are highly affected by the sampled species, and measurement of occupation of a theoretical morphospace at any given time may not be readily interpretable in the context of an evolutionary radiation. Phylogenetic information is beneficial because it permits the evolutionary radiation to be examined through time at the level of morphological changes at speciation events, and also allows for comparison with diversification rates and biogeographic patterns.
Previous analyses of the biogeographic context of the calmoniid trilobite evolutionary radiation (1) supported a widespread and geographically complex setting for speciation (Eldredge and Ormiston 1979; Lieberman 1993; Abe and Lieberman 2009); (2) suggested that most speciation occurred in the biogeographic hotspot of Bolivia; and (3) indicated that there were congruent patterns of vicariance and geodispersal (sensu Lieberman 2000) between different parts of the Malvinokaffric Realm related to episodes of sea-level rise and fall (Abe and Lieberman 2009). These all suggest that changes in earth history, in particular geological and climatic changes, played a fundamental role in causing the
radiation, matching aspects of Grant and Grant’s (2007) discussion of the radiation of Darwin’s finches. However, an important role for earth history in the calmoniid radiation does not preclude a role for ecological factors. Indeed, the argument has been made that ecological processes are the main factors affecting other cases of adaptive radiation. For instance, the aforementioned Darwin’s finches as well as examples involving cichlids (Clabaut et al. 2007), Hawaiian spiders (Gillespie 2005), and Anolis lizards (Losos et al. 1998) seem to be rife with instances of ecological processes involving convergence, character displacement, competition, and reinforcement (Schluter 2000). By focusing on the morphological changes during the calmoniid radiation, we aim to tease apart the role ecological factors played by examining (1) whether morphological change seems to increase or decline through time and with cladogenetic rank, and (2) how morphological change varies relative to several biogeographic factors, including cases when closely related trilobite species have sympatric or allopatric distributions.
Materials and Methods
Calmoniids of the Metacryphaeus group are well-preserved, abundant trilobites from the Devonian Malvinokaffric Realm (Eldredge and Branisa 1980). A phylogenetic hypothesis of the group was proposed by Lieberman et al. (1991) and Lieberman (1993) on the basis of an analysis of 44 species and 50 characters. A biogeographic analysis of the group and calculation of speciation and extinction rates was presented by Abe and Lieberman (2009). Species that were described following the Lieberman et al. (1991) and Lieberman (1993) analyses were added from Carvalho (Carvalho et al. 2003; Carvalho 2006) and Edgecombe (Edgecombe 1994; Edgecombe et al. 1994; Vaccari et al. 1994).
Geometric Morphometrics.—We used geometric morphometric techniques to quantify morphology for each trilobite cephalon on the basis of landmark data depicting shape. Morphological change in the group was quantified using Bookstein coordinate landmark data of the trilobite cephalon. Shape analysis commonly is based on measurements

MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 295
of the cephalon in the morphometric literature (e.g., Foote 1989, 1990, 1991; Smith and Lieberman 1999; Webster and Zelditch 2005) because the cephalon has easily recognizable homologous landmarks. Moreover, the cephala contain the bulk of character information used for species identification. Although Lieberman et al. (1991) and Lieberman (1993) used characters of the cephalon to generate the phylogeny of the Metacryphaeus group, these characters were not identical to the shape-change landmarks; in addition, thoracic and pygidial characters were used in the analysis. Thus, the phylogenetic and morphometric databases can be considered to be at least partially, though not completely, independent.
There are challenges in interpreting the functional or ecological meaning of changes in the morphology of trilobites (or any long extinct, fossil taxon). The grooves and bumps on the cephalic exoskeleton seem in part to reflect sites of muscle attachment leading to the stomach and limbs, such that differences in the configurations of these bumps and grooves could relate to differences in diet, motility, and lifestyle (Eldredge 1971; Fortey and Owens 1990; Whittington 1997). We follow various authors (e.g., Foote 1991, 1993, 1997; Wagner 1995, 2000; Harmon et al. 2003; Yoder et al. 2010) in positing that morphometric data (broadly construed) can provide some indication of ecospace occupation.
Landmark data were collected from digital photos of cephala (in dorsal orientation such that the sagittal plane was perpendicular to the camera lens [Shaw 1957]) representing 37 species (Appendix 1). All available holaspids with no apparent deformation or prominent diagenesis (a total of 109 cephala) housed in the two major calmoniid repositories (American Museum of Natural History, AMNH; National Museum of Natural History, USNM) were analyzed, as were specimens from the Museo Nacional Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (MNRJ). For a few rare species, landmark data were taken from previously published material deemed to be of sufficient quality and in standard dorsal orientation. We also tested for any differences between previously published material and actual museum specimens and found very little difference between the
reconstructed landmark values for either case. We selected as landmarks features that are commonly preserved and that have served as the basis for previous landmark studies of trilobites (e.g., Smith and Lieberman 1999). We chose a total of 19 landmarks (5 midpoints, 14 symmetrical pairs) (Bookstein 1991) (Fig. 2, Appendix 2), all of which are at points that are easily homologized (Bookstein 1991). When possible, points were digitized on both sides of the sagittal symmetry plane using TPSDig2 (Rohlf 2010a), and symmetrical pairs of points were reflected and averaged across the sagittal plane using BigFix6 (IMP Package, Sheets 2002); points without symmetrical pairs were used without averaging. Baseline points for the axis were the anteriormost point of the cephalon including the anterior border, and the posteromedian point of the occipital ring (Fig. 3). To remove the non-affine effects of shape (i.e., orientation, size, translation), a generalized least-square Procrustes superimposition analysis was applied in TPSRelw (Rohlf 2010b). All data are available at http:// datadryad.org and by request from the authors.
Morphological Change.—Not only is it difficult in general to identify actual ancestraldescendant pairs of species in the fossil record (Paul 1992; Smith 1994; Foote and Raup 1996), but in the particular case of the calmoniids none of the phylogenetic criteria needed to identify specific ancestors were met (no metataxa present). Furthermore, given the rapidity of the radiation of the clade, there was insufficient temporal resolution to assign putative ancestors. For this reason, speciation was considered to be a branching event without the persistence of the ancestor (see Engelmann and Wiley 1977). Geometric morphometric methods were used in conjunction with ancestral character-state reconstructions to quantify morphological change along edges of the best available phylogenetic hypothesis for the Metacryphaeus group. Ancestral character-state reconstruction of continuous characters is considered more reliable if no overall trend is affecting the evolution of the group (Oakley and Cunningham 2000; Polly 2001; Webster and Purvis 2002). In the case of the calmoniids, there do not appear to be any particular trends in morphology, because various species gain

 296 FRANCINE R. ABE AND BRUCE S. LIEBERMAN
FIGURE 2. Phylogenetic relationships of the Metacryphaeus group calmoniids from Abe and Lieberman (2009). Abbreviations indicate biogeographic areas of occurrence: Am, Amazon; Ar, Argentina; B, Bolivia; F, Falklands; Pb, Parna ́ıba; Pr, Parana ́; SA, South Africa. Asterisks denote species for which morphometric data were available and collected.
FIGURE 3. Landmarks used in geometric morphometric analyses shown on a cephalon of Metacryphaeus giganteus (redrawn from Cooper 1977). Points used correspond to midpoints, maxima of curvatures and intersection of furrows. Star-shaped points denote the baseline (symmetry axis) from which the symmetrical pairs (not shown) were reflected. The results of a Procrustes superimposition with consensus after the removal of effects of size, rotation, and translation are shown on the right.

MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 297
and lose ornamentation, change the vaulting of the cephalon, etc. Estimates of ancestral shape were calculated using single-unit, squaredchange parsimony based on the Procrustes superimposed landmark data and using Mesquite (Maddison and Maddison 2010). Squared-change parsimony assumes a Brownian motion model of evolutionary change and minimizes the sum of the squares of the differences between nodes (Maddison 1991; Maddison and Maddison 2010). For each internal node, an ancestral shape was reconstructed from descendant morphometric data, using Mesquite (Maddison and Maddison 2010). Nodes without descendant morphometric data could not be reconstructed and were not included in the data set. Mesquite (Maddison and Maddison 2010) reconstructs individual landmark data for each point using the squared-change parsimony method. These landmark data were then included in the relative warps analysis using TPSRelw (Rohlf 2010b). Relative warps analysis uses a principal components analysis of variation of the bending energy required for the shape of samples to be bent into the consensus shape (Bookstein 1989). We calculated morphological transition distance between ancestral node to descendant on the basis of the Euclidean distances, using the first three dimensions of relative warps that explained 70.64% of the total variation (41.37%, 15.69%, 13.58% for top three axes). Most of this variation was expressed in differences in the position and shape of the eyes. The Euclidean distances were calculated between available reconstructed nodes and descendants. As mentioned, for some species no landmark data were available, owing to poor preservation or dearth of specimens. Ancestral nodes that lacked morphometric data for their direct descendants were excluded from transition calculations because this makes the analyses of character change more conservative and less reliant on ancestral state reconstruction.
Analyses of Morphological Change through Time and in Relation to Biogeographic Patterns.—We compared the magnitude of morphological change at cladogenetic events associated with (1) allopatric differentiation involving range contraction and referred to as vicariance; (2)
allopatric differentiation involving range expansion (perhaps most akin to peripatric speciation) and referred to as geodispersal (Lieberman and Eldredge 1996; Lieberman 2000); and (3) no change in area, possibly involving sympatric differentiation. The nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance was used for statistical comparisons.
We used a modified Brooks Parsimony Analysis (Lieberman and Eldredge 1996; Lieberman 2000) to reconstruct ancestral node distributions given the geographic distributions of species on the phylogenetic tree. This method of phylogenetic biogeographic analysis uses Fitch parsimony to optimize the ancestral node distributions and examines the episodes of range contraction and expansion during speciation events with a parsimony algorithm to retrieve best-supported patterns of vicariance and geodispersal, respectively. Distributional data and stratigraphic information, which rely on recently published palynomorph occurrence and event stratigraphy, are presented and detailed in Abe and Lieberman (2009).
We also considered morphological transition distance through time to determine if larger morphological changes occurred earlier in the radiation. Analyses of transition distance against cladistic rank also offer a measure of morphological diversification through the evolution of a clade (Smith and Lieberman 1999). The node (n) at the root of the tree was assigned a rank of one and each descendant node is given a rank of (n + 1). For parts of the tree where branches were not fully pectinate, ranks were duplicated accordingly. Nonparametric analyses using Kendall’s coefficient of rank correlations between transition distance and cladistic rank were used.
Finally, we compared morphological transition relative to speciation rates. Speciation in the calmoniids was confined to the first two stages (Lochkovian and Pragian) of the Devonian (,9 Myr; Fig. 4), limiting our chances for comparisons. A nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test was used to look for significant differences between morphological transition distances during these two stages.

298 FRANCINE R. ABE AND BRUCE S. LIEBERMAN
                                                   FIGURE 4. Speciation rates during the diversification of the Metacryphaeus group calmoniid trilobites. Rates were high during the first two stages of the Devonian (,9 Myr), but no speciation was recorded after the Emsian (from Abe and Lieberman 2009). Different lines shown are based on calculations using different Devonian timescales.
Results
A visualization of the total morphological diversity is shown on Figure 5 as the first two principal component scores of the relative warps. This representation captures a great deal of the shape variation of calmoniid cephala, including the shape of the glabella, and the position and size of eyes, indicating that differences in morphology are being reflected by different geometric morphometric patterns. As an example, Typholoniscus baini, the sister to the remaining Metacryphaeus group, is a morphological outlier with its unusual anterior-facing ocular lobes that are rotated 90u; moreover, its eyes appear to lack lenses (Cooper 1982). This departure from the typical calmoniid eye position, together with its flattened anterior margin of the glabella and relatively wide cephalon, is captured in the geometric morphometric analysis (Fig. 5). (It is worth noting that the distinctive eye morphology of Typhloniscus did not unduly influence the results of our morphological distance analyses because the absence of Typhloniscus n. sp. did not allow for reconstruction of the ancestral Typhloniscus node.) The reconstructed ancestor of the rest of the Metacryphaeus group shows standard eyes (for trilobites), indicating that Typhloniscus’s distinctive anterior-facing eyes are an apomorphy of the genus.
Regarding morphology and biogeography, there are no significant differences in morphological transition distance between cladogenetic events that involved vicariance, range expansion, or in situ differentiation (Table 1, Fig. 6). In particular, allopatric versus sympatric (at least at the scale that could be determined) differentiation does not correlate with the amount of morphological change. Moreover, morphological transition distance does not change through time (Table 2, Fig. 7). Finally, results of correlation analyses of morphological change with cladistic rank were not significant (Kendall’s coefficient of rank correlation: t 5 0.078; p 5 0.44; n 5 51) (Fig. 8), indicating that there was no apparent trend toward decreasing (e.g., Fig. 1A) or increasing (e.g., Fig. 1C) morphological change throughout the evolutionary history of the radiation.
Discussion
Calmoniid trilobites of the Metacryphaeus group have been held up as a classic example of adaptive radiation in the fossil record (Eldredge and Cracraft 1980; Fortey and Owens 1990), and phylogenetic and biogeographic patterns and rates of speciation within the group have been characterized in detail (Eldredge and Cracraft 1980; Lieberman et al. 1991; Lieberman 1993; Abe and Lieberman 2009). Analyses of patterns of morphological change within the context of this radiation allow us to characterize the nature of the evolutionary patterns and processes that occurred in greater detail. To this end, a geometric morphometric analysis quantified morphological change during the radiation using landmark data. It was found that the early-burst model of evolutionary radiations through the speciation events was not well supported in this clade of calmoniid trilobites, and may not be a predominant pattern in evolutionary radiations in general (Harmon et al. 2010). Further, one crucial aspect of adaptive radiations that has been repeatedly identified in the literature is their ecological and competitive character, including the production of ecologically diverse species through numerous speciation events (e.g., Schluter 2000; Grant and Grant 2007), and this model of evolutionary

 MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 299
FIGURE 5. Graphical representation of morphospace from geometric morphometric analysis, using principal components plot of the first and second relative warp scores of calmoniid cephala. Deformation grid and associated specimen are shown for Typhloniscus baini (sister to the remaining Metacryphaeus group) (A), Metacryphaeus caffer (B), and Bouleia dagincourti (C). Drawings from Struve 1959 and Cooper 1982.
radiations was also not endorsed herein. In particular, if the Metacryphaeus group radiation was fundamentally about ecologically mediated speciation, one would predict that there should be greater morphological changes when speciation involved ancestors and descendants living within the same general area (where there would be greater opportunities for competitive overlap and interaction) than when it involved ancestors and descendants living in different areas. However, speciation events involving ancestors and descendants in the same general area did not differ significantly in the amount of change from events
involving ancestors and descendants living in different areas (Table 1, Fig. 6).
Of course, important caveats do need to be raised. For instance, consider the Bolivia area, where most of the calmoniid speciation events transpired (Fig. 2). We cannot verify that the speciation events that occurred in this area actually involved sympatry; instead, they may have involved smaller-scale allopatry beneath our limits of resolution. This is perhaps most likely to involve the Devonian intra-cratonic basins in Bolivia and neighboring Peru that served as the calmoniid biodiversity hot spot (Eldredge and Ormiston 1979;

300 FRANCINE R. ABE AND BRUCE S. LIEBERMAN
TABLE 1. Analysis using a nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test to consider differences between morphological transitions depending on geographic change at cladogenesis. These involved two possible allopatric modes, range expansion (geodispersal) and contraction (vicariance), and also in situ speciation (sympatry). The median and Z scores (distance from mean) are standard outputs of a nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test. Phylogeny from Abe and Lieberman (2009).
TABLE 2. Analysis of differences between morphological transitions for the first two stages of the Devonian using a nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test. Speciation rate was highest during the Lochkovian and declined slightly by the end of the Pragian (and fell to zero thereafter). Phylogeny and speciation rates from Abe and Lieberman (2009).
Lochkovian n 5 25 Median 5 0.02275 Pragian n 5 26 Median 5 0.02406 Point estimate for Lochkovian-Pragian is 20.00135 95.1% CI for Lochkovian-Pragian is (20.00895, 0.00773) Test of Lochkovian 5 Pragian vs. Lochkovian ? Pragian
is not significant p 5 0.6993
or the temporal patterns of speciation themselves, simply may be artifacts of an incomplete fossil record from which we have little access to actual paleobiogeographic or stratigraphic distributions. This is particularly relevant to areas of poor fossil preservation and sampling, such as the Devonian Amazon and Parna ́ıba Basins of Brazil, and subject to further discoveries of new species and distributions (for instance, consider the recent work of Pereira Soares et al. 2008). Fortunately, trilobites do seem to have among the very best preservation probabilities for fossil invertebrates (Foote and Raup 1996), and the Malvinokaffric Realm has been sampled fairly extensively in South America (Eldredge and Ormiston 1979; Boucot and Racheboeuf 1993), South Africa (Cooper 1982) and the Falkland Islands (Edgecombe 1994; Carvalho 2006), so this particular group may suffer from such issues less than other groups might. Of course, another important caveat is that the phylogenetic patterns and the methods of
    n Median
Geodispersal 5 0.02591 Vicariance 4 0.02765 Sympatric 42 0.01922 Overall 51
H 5 1.13 DF 5 2 p 5 0.568
Av. rank Z
30.6 0.73 31.0 0.70 25.0 21.06 26.0
   Isaacson and Sablock 1988; Abe and Lieberman 2009). However, we would reiterate, certainly organisms that live in the same general area are more likely to be able to interact competitively than those that occur in completely disjunct areas. It is also conceivable that the measures of morphology we used imply little if anything about trilobite species ecology. Still, our landmark data did capture information about the trilobite cephalon, which contains anatomically and functionally important structures. Ultimately, it seems likely that changes in cephalic shape provide some information about changing ecology, but the nature of this information is unspecified (Eldredge 1971; Fortey and Owens 1990; Webber and Hunda 2007); still, this is essentially what we are limited to by the very nature of the fossil record. It is also possible that patterns of speciation that appear to occur sympatrically, or allopatrically,
                                                                FIGURE 6. Comparison of morphologic transition distance between ancestors and descendants at speciation events involving range expansion (geodispersal), range contraction (vicariance), and in situ differentiation (sympatry). Boxes represent 25th to 75th percentile; solid circles are the mean for each group.
FIGURE 7. Morphologic transition distance between ancestors and descendants during the different Devonian stages when diversification occurred. Box represents 25th to 75th percentile; solid circles are the mean for each group.
  
 MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 301
FIGURE 8.
tic rank across the phylogeny of the Metacryphaeus group. Root of the tree was assigned a cladistic rank of one. Kendall’s coefficient of rank correlation; t 5 0.078; p 5 0.44; n 5 51.
reconstructing biogeographic patterns and ancestral morphology could be inaccurate. Particularly regarding the latter, ancestral character reconstructions of continuous characters have come under some scrutiny and criticism (Cunningham et al. 1998; Oakley and Cunningham 2000; Polly 2001), and our study did not use stratigraphic information to determine branch length and assumed equal weights for branch lengths. Considering this type of information and varying these assumptions would affect the reconstruction. Still, ancestral character-state reconstruction methods do undoubtedly have value in offering repeatable, quantitative ways for understanding the extent to which morphological evolution may vary, relatively, across a clade.
Our findings suggest that the calmoniid trilobites constitute a prominent example of a radiation that was at least partly abiotically mediated, given that a signature of ecologically mediated speciation/radiation is lacking. Rapid speciation driven by geologic and climatic changes that cause allopatry may frequently play an important role in causing evolutionary radiations in general, and may be the mechanism behind the calmoniid evolutionary radiation in particular (Abe and Lieberman 2009). In the case of the calmoniids, it appears that there was a region of geographic complexity, the Malvinokaffric Realm, that was subjected to multiple episodes of sea-level rise and fall, which would
join and separate (for the purposes of trilobites) the numerous areas within the Malvinokaffric Realm multiple times. If these episodes of sea-level rise and fall happened on appropriate time scales they would facilitate rapid and repeated speciation. Of course during the Devonian there were several major episodes of sea-level rise and fall operating on timescales commensurate with animal speciation (Eldredge and Ormiston 1979; Johnson et al. 1985; Isaacson and Sablock 1988; Hallam 1992) that would have repeatedly isolated and joined the distinct geologic basins within the Malvinokaffric Realm, allowing for numerous opportunities for range expansion and allopatric speciation (Abe and Lieberman 2009). In fact, allopatrically mediated radiations (termed non-adaptive radiations) have been documented in extant taxa (e.g., Gittenberger 1991; Cameron et al. 1996; Kozak et al. 2006) and even classic examples of so-called adaptive radiations (particularly the insular radiations) consign important roles to allopatric mechanisms (Gillespie 2005; Grant and Grant 2007; Genner et al. 2010). Further, it appears that evolutionary radiations of cichlids (Rueber et al. 1998; Sturmbauer et al. 2001; Genner et al. 2010) and anoles (Glor et al. 2004) may have been precipitated by similar types of abiotic factors: distinct geographic regions (small basins within lakes or small islands within a broader region) repeatedly joined and sundered by episodes of climatically influenced sea-level rise and fall.
In addition and notably, what appears to have led to the reduction of speciation in the calmoniids and the conclusion of the evolutionary radiation is that sea level by the later part of the Middle Devonian was sufficiently high that all of the tectonic basins in the Malvinokaffric Realm would have been continuously joined by marine connections; the subsequent oscillations (drops) in sea level during the later part of the Middle (and Late) Devonian would no longer have been sufficient to isolate tectonic basins for the purposes of marine organisms like trilobites (Abe and Lieberman 2009).
Still, we are not implying that ecological factors played no role in the radiation of these trilobites. Many factors including population
Morphologic transition distance versus cladis-

302 FRANCINE R. ABE AND BRUCE S. LIEBERMAN
size and structure, mating systems, changes in predator-prey dynamics, and other ecological aspects could well have played an important role in the morphological diversification. In addition, the divergence that occurred in allopatry may be related to ecological adaptations to distinctive environments. However, it appears from the morphometric evidence that ecologically mediated speciation has not left its stamp on this taxonomically impressive radiation.
Because the relationship between taxonomic and morphologic diversity has been of broad interest to the paleontological community for some time (Gould 1990; Foote 1993; Wills et al. 1994; Wagner 1995), it is worth considering in the context of adaptive radiations in general and this evolutionary radiation in particular. In the literature on evolutionary radiation, both early, rapid diversification and high initial disparity are sometimes interpreted as indicating the filling-in of empty and available ecological niches. Once the ecological opportunities have been taken, speciation rates should decline and morphological diversity should become constrained (Fig. 1A). Speciation rates for the calmoniids are high early and then decline (Fig. 4)—a pattern found in other evolutionary radiations (Hulbert 1993; Harmon et al. 2003; Phillimore and Price 2008). Measures of disparity through time have shown similar results with the greatest morphological change typically occurring early in radiations (see Foote 1997 for review). However, when the diversity of the calmoniids declined as a result of attrition caused by extinction, diversification did not begin anew. This suggests that it was not merely empty niche space that was serving to attract new diversity; instead, speciation rate in calmoniids better correlates with relative sea level and episodes of sea-level change (Abe and Lieberman 2009). In addition, the magnitude of morphological change does not significantly increase through time (Table 2, Fig. 7) (although there are only a limited number of temporal events to consider), nor does it change significantly with cladistic rank across the phylogeny (Fig. 8). However, the morphological change considered here, although a metric related to disparity, is not the same
thing as disparity (Smith and Lieberman 1999). Still, in the case of diversity patterns and morphological change, the calmoniid radiation seems to best match the idealized pattern shown in Figure 1B. This could indicate that diversification was occurring in the absence of ecological constraints, but other mechanisms might be indicated, including aspects of organismal development, and we are hesitant to ascribe a specific cause to explain this pattern. Notably, Mahler et al. (2010) found that during the evolutionary radiation of Greater Antillean anoles, the amount of morphological change decreased as ecological opportunities declined, and they endorsed the notion that patterns of change in overall morphology could be used to consider these issues.
Ultimately, the roles that different sorts of ecological, environmental and geological factors play in mediating evolutionary radiations will continue to be debated (Simpson 1944; Eldredge and Cracraft 1980; Erwin 1992; Vrba 1992; Cameron et al. 1996; Losos et al. 1998; Rueber et al. 1998; Schluter 2000; Gillespie 2005; Petren et al. 2005; Grant and Grant 2007; Esselstyn et al. 2009; Rundell and Price 2009). However, in this case, the calmoniids of the Metacryphaeus group were diversifying in a heterogeneous environment comprising several geological areas, and overlain upon these were several episodes of sea-level change (driven by climatic change) that stimulated opportunities for speciation (Abe and Lieberman 2009); moreover, these episodes of speciation were associated with consistent morphological change. Undoubtedly new neontological data will continue to be gathered to inform our understanding of what causes dramatic blooms of taxa to occur. Furthermore, a continuing and relevant debate will be the extent to which definitions of adaptive (and evolutionary) radiation constitute both pattern and process-based phenomena. Nonetheless, we hope that data from paleontology, which played the earliest role in the genesis of theories on evolutionary radiations (e.g., Osborn 1902; Simpson 1944), will continue to be integrated with studies from extant taxa to yield a more synthetic picture of the nature of evolutionary patterns and processes.

AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH AMNH
Location
Identification
044238
Pujravi z. M. venustus 047147
044260
044249
044257
044268
044269
044263
044243
044240
044274
17923
17953
n/a
Chacoma 49 Pujravi-z.Fb-9 Chacoma11
26336:3
26360-3
26360-9
branisa ‘‘15’’ Limba-140
n/a
Chacoma-184 z.Patacayama-115
136
n/a
36745
36722
44139
44143
44147
44144
44141
Species Punillaspis n. sp. A
Eldredgeia venustus
Eldredgeia eocryphaea Malvinocooperella pregiganteus Malvinocooperella pregiganteus ‘‘Clarkeaspis’’ gouldi Metacryphaeus rotundatus Metacryphaeus rotundatus Metacryphaeus giganteus Plesioconvexa praecursor Eldredgeia venustus Metacryphaeus convexus Vogesina lacunafera
Vogesina lacunafera
Eldredgeia venustus Metacryphaeus giganteus Metacryphaeus giganteus Metacryphaeus giganteus Vogesina aspera Plesiomalvinella boulei Malvinocooperella pregiganteus Metacryphaeus branisai Metacryphaeus curvigena Eldredgeia venustus
Eldredgeia venustus
Eldredgeia venustus Metacryphaeus curvigena Plesioconvexa praecursor Parabouleia calmonensis Bouleia dagincourti Plesiomalvinella boulei Malvinella buddae
Palpebrops donegalensis Palpebrops donegalensis Malvinella buddae
MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 305
Appendix 1
Specimens used in the geometric morphometric analyses. Lead author may be contacted for photos of specimens.
    
306
FRANCINE R. ABE AND BRUCE S. LIEBERMAN
Appendix 1. Continued. Location
Identification Species
   AMNH 44130 AMNH 044137 AMNH 44142 AMNH 46441 AMNH 29104 Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982
Carvalho et al. 1997 Carvalho et al. 1997 Carvalho et al. 1997 Carvalho et al. 2003 Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982
Cooper 1982 Edgecombe et al. 1994 Edgecombe et al. 1994 Edgecombe et al. 1994 Edgecombe et al. 1994 Edgecombe et al. 1994 Wolfart 1968
Wolfart 1968
Lieberman et al. 1991
Lieberman et al. 1991
Lieberman et al. 1991
Baldis and Longobucco 1977
Baldis and Longobucco 1977
MNRJ 33
MNRJ 35
MNRJ n/a
USNM 23815
USNM 76-3
USNM C-6
USNM Pjd-2
USNM Pjd-2
USNM Purjavi
USNM I
USNM 287920
USNM O1-9188
USNM 9230
USNM O1
USNM O1-5822-9479 USNM O1
USNM O1
USNM 457044
USNM 468743
USNM 468746
USNM 468741
USNM 468742
USNM 468744
USNM C.9
USNM 9203
USNM A-24
USNM 7.2
USNM 7.2-5820
USNM 7.2
USNM 7.2
USNM Patacamaya USNM Branisa-8.3 USNM Branisa-8.3 USNM Branisa-Belen-7.9
Metacryphaeus tuberculatus Plesiomalvinella pujravii Malvinella haugi Eldredgeia venustus
Bouleia dagincourti Metacryphaeus caffer Metacryphaeus caffer Metacryphaeus caffer Metacryphaeus caffer Metacryphaeus kegeli Metacryphaeus kegeli Metacryphaeus meloi
Wolfartaspis liebermani Typhloniscus baini Typhloniscus baini Typhloniscus baini Metacryphaeus caffer Eldredgeia venustus (S. Afr.) Talacastops sp. nov. Talacastops zarelae Talacastops zarelae
Bouleia n. sp. cf. sphaericeps Parabouleia eldredgei Plesioconvexa praecursor Bouleia sphaericeps Metacryphaeus australis Malvinella haugi
Eldredgeia venustus (Pimenteira var.) Punillaspis argentina
Punillaspis argentina
Metacryphaeus australis Metacryphaeus australis Metacryphaeus australis
Eldredgeia venustus
Malvinella buddae Plesiomalvinella boulei Vogesina aspera
Malvinella buddae
Malvinella buddae Metacryphaeus branisai Bouleia dagincourti Metacryphaeus convexus Malvinocooperella pregiganteus Metacryphaeus curvigena Plesiomalvinella pujravii Metacryphaeus curvigena Plesiomalvinella pujravii Metacryphaeus curvigena Metacryphaeus branisai Metacryphaeus curvigena Clarkeaspis padillaensis Clarkeaspis padillaensis Metacryphaeus branisai Vogesina aspera Malvinocooperella pregiganteus Metacryphaeus giganteus Metacryphaeus giganteus Plesiomalvinella boulei Plesiomalvinella boulei Plesiomalvinella boulei Plesiomalvinella boulei Eldredgeia venustus Metacryphaeus tuberculatus Wolfartaspis cornutus
 
MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGE DURING AN EVOLUTIONARY RADIATION 307 Appendix 1. Continued.
  Location
Identification
Branisa-Belen-7.9 Branisa-Belen-7.9 Eremopyge-7-9 Branisa-Belen Branisa-Belen-7.9-X69-M-196 Branisa-Belen-7.9 Branisa-Belen-7.9 Branisa-Belen-7.9 Branisa-Belen-7.9-M210 Branisa-7.3
Branisa-7.7 Branisa-7.7 Branisa-7.7 Branisa-7.5 Branisa-7.10 Branisa-C6
Appendix 2 8.
9. 10. 11.
1. Anteriormost point on cephalon located on anterior margin 12. (may be same as 2 if no anterior border present) 13.
2. Anteriormost point of glabella 14.
3. Midpoint of posterior margin of S0 15.
4. Midpoint of anterior margin of L0 16.
5. Midpoint of posterior margin of L0; landmark placed at base 17.
if occipital spine or node present
6. Anterolateral contact of axial furrow with cephalic margin 18.
7. Posterior and distal end of S3 contact with axial furrow 19.
Species
Wolfartaspis cornutus Wolfartaspis cornutus Wolfartaspis cornutus Malvinocooperella pregiganteus Wolfartaspis cornutus Wolfartaspis cornutus Vogesina aspera
Vogesina aspera
Vogesina aspera Metacryphaeus convexus Eldredgeia venustus Eldredgeia venustus Metacryphaeus tuberculatus
Malvinella buddae Vogesina lacunafera Vogesina aspera
Posterior and proximal end of S3
Contact of axial furrow with transverse line to proximal end of S2 Posterior and distal end of S2
Posterior and proximal end of S2
Contact of axial furrow with distal end of S1
Proximal end of S1
Contact of axial furrow with posterolateral edge of L1 Anteriormost point at base of eye
Posteriormost point at base of eye
Contact of lateral cephalic margin directly transverse of proximal end of S2
Anterodistal end of posterior border furrow
Midpoint on eye curvature
 USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM USNM
 Description of landmark locations used in the geometric morphometric analyses on trilobite cephala.
