   Molecular Ecology (2011) 20, 1401–1413 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05005.x
Assessing the complex architecture of polygenic traits in diverged yeast populations
FRANCISCO A. CUBILLOS,* ELEONORA BILLI,*, 1 ENIKO ̈ ZO ̈ RGO ̈ ,†‡ LEOPOLD PARTS,§ PATRICK FARGIER,*,1 STIG OMHOLT,‡ ANDERS BLOMBERG,† JONAS WARRINGER,†‡ EDWARD J. LOUIS*,2 and GIANNI LITI*,2
*Centre for Genetics and Genomics, Queen’s Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK, †Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, 41390 Gothenburg, Sweden, ‡Centre for Integrative Genetics (CIGENE), Norwegian University of Life Sciences (UMB), PO Box 5003, 1432 A ̊ s, Norway, §The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, CB10 1SA, UK
Abstract
Phenotypic variation arising from populations adapting to different niches has a complex underlying genetic architecture. A major challenge in modern biology is to identify the causative variants driving phenotypic variation. Recently, the baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae has emerged as a powerful model for dissecting complex traits. However, past studies using a laboratory strain were unable to reveal the complete architecture of polygenic traits. Here, we present a linkage study using 576 recombinant strains obtained from crosses of isolates representative of the major lineages. The meiotic recombinational landscape appears largely conserved between populations; however, strain-specific hotspots were also detected. Quantitative measurements of growth in 23 distinct ecologically relevant environments show that our recombinant population recapitulates most of the standing phenotypic variation described in the species. Linkage analysis detected an average of 6.3 distinct QTLs for each condition tested in all crosses, explaining on average 39% of the phenotypic variation. The QTLs detected are not constrained to a small number of loci, and the majority are specific to a single cross-combination and to a specific environment. Moreover, crosses between strains of similar phenotypes generate greater variation in the offspring, suggesting the presence of many antagonistic alleles and epistatic interactions. We found that subtelomeric regions play a key role in defining individual quantitative variation, emphasizing the importance of the adaptive nature of these regions in natural populations. This set of recombinant strains is a powerful tool for investigating the complex architecture of polygenic traits.
Keywords: complex traits, quantitative trait loci, recombinants, yeast
Received 15 July 2010; revision received 26 November 2010; accepted 12 December 2010
Correspondence: Gianni Liti or Edward J. Louis, Fax:
+44 115 8231140; E-mail: gianni.liti@nottingham.ac.uk or ed.louis@nottingham.ac.uk.
1Present address: (E.B.), Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB and Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (P.F.) CNRS UMR6247, Ge ́ne ́tique, Re ́production et De ́veloppement (GReD), Clermont Universite ́, 24 avenue des Landais, 63177 Aubie`re Cedex, France.
2These authors contributed equally to this work.
Introduction
Natural populations have evolved under different adaptive constraints, which shape the standing fitness variation within a species (Barton & Keightley 2002). Most traits vary quantitatively and have a complex inheritance among populations. A major challenge in modern biology is to identify the causative genetic variants driving phenotypic variation and niche adaptation. This is attributable to the polygenic nature of
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1402 F. A. CUBILLOS ET AL.
complex traits with many loci contributing to variation through small direct effects as well as interactions with other loci and the environment. Mapping quantitative trait loci (QTLs) can help to unveil the genetic mechanisms underlying quantitative phenotypic variation. The main approaches to identify QTLs are linkage analysis and association mapping, both aided by knowledge of the population structure. Linkage analysis uses either specific crosses between individuals with diverged phenotypes or family studies with siblings, where recombination breaks down marker linkage allowing causative loci to segregate together with the nearest genetic marker. Association mapping utilizes natural populations and historical recombination events (Mackay et al. 2009).
In the past decade, Saccharomyces cerevisiae has served as a powerful model for linkage analysis, but only recently, its ecology has been appreciated (Gerke et al. 2009). A series of studies have primarily used two sets of segregants, with the laboratory strain S288c (or its BY derivative) as one of the parents. The progeny set derived from a cross between the BY and RM11-1a (isolated from a California vineyard) strains has been used to find expression QTLs (Brem et al. 2005; Smith & Kruglyak 2008) but also assayed for numerous other phenotypes including small-molecule sensitivities (Perlstein et al. 2007), cell morphology (Nogami et al. 2007) and mitochondrial instability (Dimitrov et al. 2009). The cross between strains YJM789 (clinical isolate) and S288c was utilized to accurately dissect the causative polymorphisms behind heat-sensitivity variation (Sinha et al. 2008; Steinmetz et al. 2002) and to generate a high-resolution meiotic recombination map (Mancera et al. 2008). These studies mapped many individual genes and allelic variants down to the nucleotide level that contribute to the phenotypic differences between the parental strains. Several polymorphisms (e.g. within the post-transcriptional regulator MKT1 in S288c) are QTL hotspots, thus contributing to a large number of traits and revealing a high degree of pleiotropy (Ehrenreich et al. 2009). Although these segregants have proven fruitful in mapping causative loci, single cross experiments using laboratory strains provide a poor understanding of the relationship between the genetic background and QTLs, underestimating the complex genetic architecture of polygenic traits in yeast. Furthermore, the laboratory strains only capture a small fraction of the phenotypic variation present in natural populations.
Strains adapted to different niches represent a rich resource for revealing the evolutionary trajectories of a trait, because particular alleles have been selected in specific environments (Carreto et al. 2008; Lidzbarsky et al. 2009; Liti et al. 2009a; Slate 2005). Recent resequencing
and phenetic characterization of multiple S. cerevisiae isolates provided evidence of substantial genetic and phenotypic diversity (Liti et al. 2009a). Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) analysis revealed the population structure of the species showing several clean lineages as well as strains of mixed ancestry (with mosaic recombinant genomes) originating from outcrosses. Pairs of clean lineages exhibited an average of 1 SNP every 161 bp (equivalent to 0.62% of sequence divergence) with the majority of the segregating sites being monomorphic and private within lineages. These qualities make clean lineages ideal for linkage analysis as they present an even distribution of segregating sites across the genome, which have coevolved within a specific genomic context. Moreover, these isolates have been subjected to high-throughput phenotypic analysis under a wide range of environmental conditions (Liti et al. 2009a). The S. cerevisiae strains clustered into two major phenetic groups, one characterized by faster growth and shorter lag.
In this study, we present a set of 576 recombinant S. cerevisiae obtained from crosses of four strains representative of the major populations and derived from different ecological niches. The Sake and Wine ⁄ European lineages are representative of the strains used in different fermentation processes, where two distinct domestication events have been proposed (Fay & Benavides 2005; Schacherer et al. 2009). The third population contains strains isolated in West Africa and is associated with spontaneous alcoholic fermentation (e.g. palm wine) (Ciani et al. 2004; Legras et al. 2007). Finally, the North American strain corresponds to wild isolates obtained from oak trees (Sniegowski et al. 2002). All segregants were extensively genotyped and growthphenotyped for many environmental conditions of ecological relevance. Using these sets of segregants, we determined the QTLs governing complex traits in diverged natural populations. Our results reveal more complexity than was previously known and indicate the presence of distinct alleles shaping adaptation to specific environments. Furthermore, we sought to provide for the first time a comparative map of the recombination landscape between multiple populations.
Materials and methods
Strains
We selected five founder strains as representatives of each clean lineage (North American (NA): YPS128, West African (WA): DBVPG6044, Sake (SA): Y12, Wine ⁄ European (WE): DBVPG6765, and Malaysian (MA): UWOPS03.461.4) (Liti et al. 2009a). We previously derived stable haploid versions (ho::HygMX, ura3::KanMX) from
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

the original wild-type homothallic strains (Cubillos et al. 2009). Haploid strains with opposite mating types (Mat a and Mat a) were crossed on yeast peptone dextrose agar (YPDA) media. Individual colonies were isolated to confirm successful crosses by mating type test using tester strains and diagnostic PCR for the mat locus (Huxley et al. 1990). F1 diploid hybrids were sporulated for 3–5 days at 23 °C on 1% potassium acetate media, and tetrads containing the four haploid meiotic products were dissected as previously described (Naumov et al. 1994). Ninety-six segregants were generated from 24 tetrads in every cross. All segregants are available at the National Collection of Yeast Cultures (http://www.ncyc.co.uk/index.html).
Genotyping
Genotypes were obtained as previously described (Liti et al. 2009b) using high-resolution melting coupled with real-time PCR (HRM-PCR). All 576 segregants were SNP-genotyped for the same 171 markers placed every approximately 70 kb (with no missing data), and 31 additional markers were added in selected crosses making a total of approximately 103 000 genotype calls [genotype error < 0.25% (Herrmann et al. 2006)] (Table S1, Supporting information). Marker nomenclature consists of a Roman numeral for chromosome number and an Arabic numeral for chromosomal coordinate (e.g. marker III.251 is in chromosome III at position 251 kb based on the S288c reference genome). Markers were placed starting from the first unique sequence adjacent to the subtelomeric regions. Synteny along chromosomes was supported by linkage with neighbouring markers analysed using rQTL (Broman et al. 2003). Our genotyping covered 88.9% of the genome using the S288c strain as a reference. The only region of the genome not covered was the subtelomeric containing the repetitive multicopy gene families. Primer sequences are shown in Table S2(Supporting information).
Phenotyping
Segregants were subjected to precise growth phenotyping to an average of 12 conditions selected from a panel of 23 using a high-resolution microcultivation approach as previously described (Liti et al. 2009a; Warringer & Blomberg 2003) (Table S3, Supporting information). In brief, segregants were precultivated in 350 ll of synthetic defined (SD) medium (0.14% yeast nitrogen base, 0.5% ammonium sulphate and 1% succinic acid; 2% (w⁄v) glucose; 0.077% complete supplement mixture (CSM, ForMedium), pH set to 5.8 with NaOH) and incubated for 48 h at 30 °C. For experimen-
tal runs, strains were inoculated to an optical density of 0.03–0.1 in 350 ll of SD medium and cultivated in a Bioscreen analyzer C (Growth curves Oy, Finland) as previously described (Warringer et al. 2003). Strains were run in duplicate on separate plates including four replicates of the laboratory strain BY4741 in randomized (once) positions on each plate as reference. Optical density was measured every 20 min for 72 h to produce high-resolution growth curves from which the three fitness variables, growth rate, growth efficiency and growth adaptation, were extracted using an automated procedure (Warringer et al. 2008). Growth rate was extracted as the slope of the exponential phase converted into population doubling time (h), growth lag (h) was given by the intercept of the initial density and the slope at exponential phase, and growth efficiency (optical density units) was calculated as the total change in density for cultures having reached stationary phase. Fitness variables for segregants were converted onto log scale (LN) and normalized to the corresponding measure from four reference strains (BY4741) included on the same plate (BY4741 ⁄ segregant or, for efficiency, segregant ⁄ BY4741). The resulting relative growth measures were used for all subsequent analysis. Table S4 (Supporting information) summarizes environments for each cross. The percentage of transgressive spores was calculated as previously described (Marullo et al. 2006). The percentage of phenotypic space covered for heat, paraquat and arsenite was calculated considering the total range within the natural population of 36 S. cerevisiae strains previously phenotyped (Liti et al. 2009a) and the range of the parental strains. All averages are indicated with standard errors.
Hotspot analysis
Recombination hotspots were estimated as previously described (Mancera et al. 2008). Briefly, we determined the average recombination rate q in each cross k as the number of observed recombination events divided by the genome size. We then used a Poisson model with mean q to assess the significance of hotand coldspots in each cross. A hotspot was deemed significant if the probability of observing at least as many recombination events under the model was less than a = 0.005 (FDR <10%). Similarly, coldspots were called significant if the probability of observing up to that many recombination events was less than 0.005.
Linkage analysis
Linkage analysis was performed with the rQTL software (Broman et al. 2003). We calculated LOD scores
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
YEAST COMPLEX TRAITS 1403

1404 F. A. CUBILLOS ET AL.
using the nonparametric model. The significance of a QTL was determined from permutations. For each trait and cross, we permuted the phenotype values within tetrads 1000 times, recording the maximum LOD score each time. We called a QTL significant if its LOD score was greater than the 0.05 tail of the 1000 permuted LOD scores. The number of QTLs obtained does not account for markers detected in multiple crosses for a single condition, or in the three growth variables or in neighbouring markers.
Pooled data analysis of one-against-all alleles was performed by considering each strain S separately and encoding the genotype of each locus in every segregant in every cross as S, or O for any Other strain. This set of 6 · 96 genotypes and associated phenotypes for strain S was then treated identically to a single cross and analysed as described earlier.
The two-locus genome scan was performed for each cross using a standard interval mapping approach under the normal model implemented in rQTL scantwo (‘‘normal’’ model, ‘‘em’’ method). For every cross and every phenotype, we permuted the phenotype within tetrads using the perm.strata option 5 times and recorded the maximum two-locus LOD score each time. We called an interaction with (base e) LOD score L significant if L was greater than any permuted LOD score for this phenotype in this cross and 2L was greater than the 0.05 ⁄ (200*100*216) tail of the v2 distribution with 1 degree of freedom. This corresponds to a false-positive rate of 5% after Bonferroni correction for the number of tested locus pairs (200*100) and cross ⁄ phenotype combinations (216). We filtered all putative interaction events to be significant at the 5% FDR under the normal model. For each of the remaining interactions, we permuted the phenotype 5000 times and repeated the twolocus analysis across all markers, recording the largest LOD score each time. We calculated the permutation test P-value as the fraction of permutations for which the highest observed LOD score was greater than the original interaction LOD score.
Telomere truncation and heat-sensitivity assay
To validate the presence of a QTL in subtelomeric regions, we modified the reciprocal hemizygosity assay (Steinmetz et al. 2002). The gene URA3 (essential for pyrimidine biosynthesis) previously deleted in the parental strains (Cubillos et al. 2009) was used as a selectable marker. Insertion of the marker in the YPS128 x DBVPG6044 hybrid was performed as described (Gottschling et al. 1990) to truncate the chromosome XIII right subtelomeric region. The uncharacterized single copy ORF YMR317W was used as target, and HRMPCR was performed to genotype the nondeleted allele.
To assess the phenotypic differences given by each subtelomere in the hybrid background, a temperaturesensitivity plate assay was performed spotting 10-fold serial dilution of cells on YPDA media incubated at 30 and40°Cfor48h.
Physical mapping of the ARR gene cluster
To investigate the contribution of the arsenicals resistance (ARR) genes to the arsenite resistance variation, we physically mapped the cluster in the four parental strains and 9 highly resistant and sensitive segregants by pulse field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and probe hybridization (ARR1 and ARR3 probes). PFGE, Southern blot and hybridization were performed as previously described (Louis 1998). Probe PCR amplification from S288c genomic DNA was performed using the following primers (5¢-3¢): ARR1, FW (GAGAGGAACATGCCTTCTG), RV (GCTGCCGCTGTTTCTATTG); ARR3, FW (GGTCATCCCAATCTAATGGG), RV (GGAAATAGCAATTGCCAGGG).
Results
A resource of recombinant S. cerevisiae for linkage analysis
To generate a recombinant population between diverged S. cerevisiae isolates, we selected one strain as a representative of each clean lineage (Wine ⁄ European, WE; North American, NA; West African, WA; Malaysian, MA; and Sake, SA) from the Saccharomyces Genome Resequencing Project (SGRP) (Liti et al. 2009a) strain set and generated a grid of crosses from all 10 pairwise combinations (Fig. S1, Supporting information). Spore viability varied greatly among crosses (Table S5, Supporting information). The Malaysian strains, isolated in the rain forest from Bertam Palm (Wiens et al. 2008), were found to be reproductively isolated when crossed to any other lineage (2.5–10% gamete viability), but highly viable (93.8%) when crossed to each other. The lack of segregants from crosses involving the Malaysian strain prevented any further experiments, and these were therefore not included in the linkage analysis. The WE · WA cross also showed partial reproductive isolation with 49.2% spore viability (Table S5, Supporting information). The lower gamete viability obtained resulted from the high incidence of two viable spore tetrads (data not shown); however, unlike the Malaysian crosses, full viable tetrads were obtained for this cross-combination. The remaining five crosses exhibited high spore viability (average 82.4%). We isolated 96 segregants in each of the six crosses for a total of 576 segregants.
 Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Comparative analysis of the recombination landscape reveals new meiotic hotspots
All segregants were obtained from four viable gamete tetrads by micromanipulation and genotyped at the same 171 loci (Table S1, Supporting information). In total, we inferred 8068 crossover events. From previous high-resolution crossover mapping (Mancera et al. 2008), we estimate that 84% of crossovers were detected with the exception of closely spaced events (<70 kb) and those occurring within the subtelomeric regions. The overall recombination frequency strongly correlated with chromosome size (R = 0.97) (Fig. 1) as previously reported (Kaback et al. 1999; Mancera et al. 2008), with average distances between two recombination events ranging from 195 to 249 kb and crossover counts from 48 to 64.5 per meiosis (Table S6, Supporting information). We found a 25% recombination reduction for two of the crosses involving the WA isolate (crossed to SA and WE, Table S6, Supporting information). Moreover, in the WA · WE cross, we observed a higher number of chromosomes per tetrad segregating without a detectable crossover (average 1.3 vs. 0.7 in the other crosses), a high number of tetrads with only two viable spores, increased aneuploidies (data not shown) and low gamete viability, suggesting genetic incompatibilities between these two lineages.
We analysed crossover distribution to infer recombination hotspots (Table S7, Supporting information). A total of 32 hotspots were detected (P < 0.005, FDR <10%) with 9 of them not previously mapped (Mancera et al. 2008) (Fig. S2, Supporting information). Most of
the new hotspots (77%) were unique to a single crosscombination, for instance the NA · SA cross showed a 60% increase in the recombination rate compared to the other crosses within the 566to 578-kb interval in chromosome XI (Fig. S3a, Supporting information). However, highly conserved hotspots among crosses were also found. For example, a meiotic hotspot was detected in chromosome I (62–78 kb) (Mancera et al. 2008) for five of the six crosses (Fig. S3b, Supporting information). The sixth cross (NA · SA) exhibited a recombination hotspot at a neighbouring interval (37–62 kb), probably causing interference over the adjacent hotspot. Similarly, we found major recombination coldspots conserved near centromeric regions (Liebman et al. 1988) and many cross-specific coldspots with marginally significant P-values in other regions of the genome; however, the lack of statistical power did not allow comparative analysis (Table S8, Supporting information).
Quantitative growth variation suggests polygenic contribution in all environmental conditions
High-resolution phenotype analysis in combination with linkage analysis can shed light into the heritability and the genetic factors affecting a trait. We have previously measured quantitative changes in yeast growth under a wide range of 67 environments and found a high phenotypic diversity, likely due to the different ecological niches occupied by S. cerevisiae (Kvitek et al. 2008; Liti et al. 2009a). To study the phenotypic diversity of the segregants, we exposed each set to an average of 12 different environmental conditions that were chosen from a panel of 23 to maximize differences between the founder strains (Table S3, Supporting information). Conditions were selected as to represent a broad spectrum of nutrients, metal ions, plant and bacterial toxins as well as climate factors that are common and vary quantitatively in typical yeast habitats. Some conditions are shared among crosses, and three were extensively analysed in all six combinations: hightemperature growth (a quantitative trait related to yeast virulence), arsenite (highly toxic metal, considered an environmental threat) and paraquat (a nonselective herbicide used in cultivation of grapes and rice) (Table S4, Supporting information). The parental strains capture more than 50% of the phenotypic variation in the original population of 36 sequenced strains for the selected conditions. We extracted three independent growth traits (adaptation, rate and efficiency) providing distinct measures of cellular physiology (Warringer & Blomberg 2003). Most phenotype distributions (84%) were not strongly bimodal, suggesting a polygenic contribution (Fig. S4, Supporting information). Transgression levels, i.e. percentage of segregants exceeding the phenotypic
YEAST COMPLEX TRAITS 1405
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
WE x SA
WE x NA
NA x SA
WA x NA
WE x WA
WA x SA
       200 400
600 800
1000 1200 1400 1600
Chromosome size (kb)
Fig. 1 Recombination rate varies among crosses. Linear regressions of crossover count (y-axis) per meiosis are plotted against chromosome size (x-axis). Two crosses, WA · WE and WA · SA, show a significant reduction in recombination rate.
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Average crossover/meiosis

 1406 F. A. CUBILLOS ET AL.
range of their parents by at least 2 SD (Marullo et al. 2006), can give insight into the genetics underlying complex traits. The highest number of transgressive segregants was observed in crosses of parental strains with the most similar phenotypes. For instance, 30.9% of the progeny showed a transgressive phenotype in the cross between two paraquat-sensitive strains, WE · WA, compared to 4.2% when the WE was crossed to the highly resistant SA strain (Fig. 2a–c). This trend was also observed for arsenite and heat resistance. Overall, no differences were found between the numbers of resistant or sensitive transgressive segregants on each trait, suggesting an even segregation of genetic variants and their epistatic interactions. Moreover, our artificial population of segregants overlapped the phenotypic range of 33 out of 36 SGRP isolates for paraquat tolerance, demonstrating the extensive diversity covered by our artificial population (Fig. 2d).
Linkage analysis indicates that most QTLs are context dependent
Linkage analysis allowed us to map QTL intervals responsible for the natural phenotypic variation. Using a permutation analysis, we identified 82 significant intervals (P < 0.05) for the conditions examined (Table S9, Supporting information). We found an average of 6.3 ± 1.2 distinct QTL intervals for the conditions tested in all 6 crosses (Fig. 3a). Moreover, we detected 10 additional QTLs when the linkage scan was performed on pooled data from the three crosses involving the same strain (e.g. WA vs. others) (Table S10, Supporting information and Fig. 3). For many of the traits, we found QTL intervals containing likely candidate genes: CuCl2 tolerance (VIII.197 nearby CUP1-CUP2 genes), NaCl, LiCl tolerance (IV.545, ENA1 ⁄ 2 ⁄ 5 genes), galactose (IV.465, GAL3) and maltose growth (II.769
(a) 0.5 0 –0.5 –1 –1.5 –2
WA
25%
33%
(b) 0.5 0
–0.5 –1 –1.5 –2
(d) 1 0.5 0 –0.5 –1 –1.5 –2 –2.5
(c)
3 2 1 0 –1 –2 –3
WE
0 20 40 60 80 100 Segregants
459 (T–)
469 (T+)
WA
WE
0 20 40 60 80 100 Segregants
0 10 20 30 Hours
SA NA
WA
WE
SGRP Set
Segregants
Fig. 2 Growth rate variation in paraquat. (a) Growth rate values relative to the reference strain BY4741 are shown on the y-axis for 96 ranked segregants of the WA · WE cross. These parental strains exhibited similar paraquat sensitivity (see panel d). Dots indicate: segregants with transgressive phenotypes (exceeding two parental standard deviations, blue), parental strains (black) and segregants within the phenotypic range of the parental strains (red), transgressive phenotypic space is highlighted in grey. (b) Similar plot as above, with parental strains showing extreme growth variation for paraquat. Parental strains (black), segregants with transgressive (brown) and nontransgressive (green) phenotypes are shown. (c) Detailed growth curves of parentals and transgressive segregants (T) with extreme traits in the WA · WE cross. (d). Phenotypic diversity for paraquat (400 lg ⁄ ml) tolerance in recombinant (blue) and natural (red) S. cerevisiae populations. Parental strains used to generate the crosses are indicated (black squares). Doubling time relative to the reference strain BY4741 (growth rate) is shown in the y-axis. The spread scatter was used to pull apart individual data point on the x-axis.
next to
MAL31 ⁄ 32 ⁄ 33) (J
SA
7%
WE
Warringer,
3%
unpublished). To
Optical density (log2 OD) Relative growth rate
Relative growth rate Relative growth rate
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

 (a) 10
8 6 4 2 0
(b) 10
WA individual
YEAST COMPLEX TRAITS 1407 Context dependent
8 6 4 2 0
WA pooled
NAxWE NAxSA
NAxWA WExSA
WExWA SAxWA
I III IV V VII IX XI XIII XV
69% strain
QTL
Strain dependent
31%
Chromosome
LOD LOD
I III IV V VII IX XI XIII XV
Chromosome
Fig. 3 Linkage analysis for growth rate in paraquat. (a) LOD plot from linkage analysis using a nonparametric model. QTL significance was determined by a permutation test. (b) LOD plot. Values calculated as a panel from linkage analysis of the WA strain analysed individually (grey) or as a pool (red).
confirm the candidate gene for galactose, a hybrid between the GAL3 BY knockout (gene deletion collection) and the WA or NA strain was generated and grown in complete media supplemented with galactose as carbon source. The plating assay showed a 100-fold defect in the hybrid containing the WA GAL3 allele (Fig. S5, Supporting information). This defect was not observed in the hybrid with the NA allele. A sequence alignment for this gene between all four founder strains detected the presence of a premature stop codon in the coding sequence of the WA strain (J Warringer, unpublished), absent in any other isolate which can explain the inability of the WA strain to utilize galactose.
A third (31%) of the QTLs for heat, paraquat and arsenite were present in more than one crosscombination involving the same strain. We define this set of novel QTLs as ‘‘strain dependent’’ because the QTL was detected regardless of the genetic background of the partner (Fig. 4). For example, all crosses containing the heat-sensitive WA strain showed a major QTL mapping in the subtelomeric region of chromosome XIII (XIII.875). Conversely, 69% of QTLs were only detected as significant in a single cross-combination [context dependent (Mackay et al. 2009), e.g. heat, XV.920]. Strain-dependent QTLs had higher LOD values (average LOD >7) and explain a higher fraction of the variance compared to context-dependent QTLs (Table S9–12, Supporting information), suggesting that these causative alleles have strong effects on the phenotype. In addition, the majority of the QTLs were unique
Fig. 4 Classification of QTLs detected. Percentage of contextdependent or strain-dependent QTLs is indicated. Coloured circles indicated the four parental strains, straight black lines the six pairwise combinations and red dots the QTLs.
to a specific environmental condition with no markers showing high QTL density over all environments (Fig. 5). Interestingly, we were able to map QTLs in crosses between parental strains with similar phenotype. For example, we detected more QTLs for paraquat tolerance in the cross from parents with similar phenotype (NA · SA) compared to the cross where the parents exhibited extreme phenotypes (WE · SA) (Table S9, Supporting information).
We performed a two-locus scan and detected one putative epistatic interaction event (markers II.469– VII.272, LOD = 6.57 P < 3*10)8, normal model; P < 0.001, permutation test). These markers were not detected as QTLs when analysed individually, suggesting an effect dependent on their interaction. For these markers, segregants carrying the nonparental combination showed an increased growth in CuCl2 when compared to segregants with the parental configuration (Fig. S6, Supporting information). This positive epistasis opposes that described in S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus for mismatch repair genes (MLH1 and PMS1) (Demogines et al. 2008) and yKu alleles (Liti et al. 2009b) respectively, where nonparental configurations decreased the fitness of the segregants.
Using a targeted backcross strategy (Sinha et al. 2008), we tested whether additional QTLs could be detected once the major QTL has been removed from the segregating population. A heat-resistant segregant carrying a WA-sensitive allele for the strong QTL on chromosome XIII (XIII.875) was backcrossed to the WA
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
cross

1408 F. A. CUBILLOS ET AL.
50
  40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 5 Frequency distribution of markers with significant association. The number of conditions with significant association (number of traits) (x-axis) per marker (y-axis) was plotted to infer the degree of pleiotropy. Subtelomeric marker frequency (red) and non-subtelomeric marker frequency (green) are shown.
      1234 Number of Traits
    Subtelomeric QTLs Non-Subtelomeric QTLs
            strain making this QTL region homozygous. Using 96 backcross segregants, we detected only one novel QTL (II.546) which explained approximately 20% of the phenotypic variation in the backcross (Fig. S7, Supporting information). These results suggest that the backcross strategy is effective for the identification of additional small effect QTLs in a trait within a single cross (Steinmetz et al. 2002) but has a limited benefit in detecting additional QTLs with larger effects. In this case, new cross-combinations would be more fruitful.
Subtelomeres are key regions in defining quantitative variation
Linkage analysis mapped 47% of the QTLs for heat, paraquat and arsenite (Fig. 5) to the subtelomeric region, explaining on average 27% of the total trait variation (Table S11, Supporting information). This is in contrast to previous studies where few QTLs were observed within these regions (Ehrenreich et al. 2009). The strong heat-sensitive QTL in the WA (XIII.875 QTL) appears to be subtelomeric and explains the bimodal phenotypic distribution. However, at least one additional QTL was detected in each cross (Table S9, Supporting information). We refined the mapping for this
QTL by adding additional markers towards the telomere and generated 500 additional F1 segregants from the WA · NA cross. We densely genotyped 88 segregants with an extreme phenotype that were recombinants for this interval and mapped the QTL to the last unique sequence (position 911kb) of chromosome XIII before the repetitive subtelomeric sequences. To validate this region as a QTL, we performed a modified reciprocal hemizygosity assay (Steinmetz et al. 2002) by truncating the subtelomere from position 911 kb towards the chromosome end in the WA · NA hybrid (Fig. 6a). Subsequently, to estimate the phenotypic differences between the two reciprocal hemizygotes, a temperature growth plate assay was performed. We observed over 100-fold difference in growth between the hemizygotes, validating the presence of a major QTL in the right subtelomeric region of chromosome XIII (Fig. 6b).
Similarly, the three strongest QTLs for arsenite resistance mapped to subtelomeres XVI-R, III-R and IV-R. The ARR gene cluster (ARR1-3) has been described as a key player in controlling arsenite tolerance (Wysocki et al. 1997) and is located in XVI-R subtelomere in S288c. Its location and copy number vary greatly among the Saccharomyces sensu stricto strains (Maciaszczyk et al. 2004). Hybridization of the karyotype of the four parental strains and 9 highly resistant and sensitive segregants from different crosses using ARR1 and ARR3 probes mapped the ARR cluster to III-R in the WA and to IV-R in the SA strains, consistent with the QTLs mapped in this region by linkage analysis (Fig. S8a, Supporting information). Furthermore, we found a strong correlation between the ARR copy number and arsenite resistance (Fig. S8b, Supporting information). However, the ARR segregation does not explain the whole phenotypic variation, and additional QTLs with minor effect were also detected (Table S11, Supporting information).
Discussion
Although the baker’s yeast, S. cerevisiae, is a primary model organism, little is known about its ecology and distribution in nature. Initial sampling mostly concentrated on sources related to alcoholic beverage fermentation processes (Fay & Benavides 2005; Goddard et al. 2009; Landry et al. 2006; Liti et al. 2009a; Mortimer 2000). Recently, S. cerevisiae strains have also been isolated from oak tree exudates in North American and European woodlands where they coexist with wild S. paradoxus (Sampaio & Goncalves 2008; Sniegowski et al. 2002).
The different S. cerevisiae isolates show marked genetic and phenotypic variation providing a powerful
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Number of QTLs

tool for quantitative genetic studies (Liti et al. 2009a). However, this variation has not yet been exploited because most of studies have used the laboratory strain S288c (or its derivatives) crossed to another partner. The laboratory strain is thought to be highly adapted to artificial conditions and does not represent the real ecological diversity of the species (Brem et al. 2002; Ehrenreich et al. 2009, 2010; Steinmetz et al. 2002). To exploit the natural genetic and phenotypic variation of the species, we generated a segregating population by crossing five S. cerevisiae strains in all possible combinations. These lineages represent the main genetic variants documented so far and were isolated from distinct niches either from the wild or associated with fermentation processes. We isolated 576 segregants from 6F1 hybrids. The founder strains selected from the four lineages sampled more than 64% of the known S. cerevisiae SNPs (Liti et al. 2009a). Furthermore, this selection of strains captured most of the natural phenotypic growth variation in different environments, with the WE and SA grouping with the fast-growing strains and the NA and WA with the slow-growing group. All the genotyped segregants are publically available (http:// www.ncyc.co.uk), providing a comprehensive resource for genetic and physiological studies, currently lacking for the yeast community. Similar tools have proven useful for mouse and Arabidopsis quantitative genetics studies (Balasubramanian et al. 2009; Hunter & Crawford 2008; Simon et al. 2008).
We found that the Malaysian lineage is reproductively isolated from the others, consistent with previous
reports (Naumov et al. 2006). The low gamete viability cannot be explained by the level of sequence divergence (Greig et al. 2003; Liti et al. 2006), which is similar to other pairs of lineages (Table S5, Supporting information). The genetic basis of the reproductive isolation remains unclear. The WE · WA also shows reduced spore viability (approximately 49%) compared with the other crosses (approximately 80%) (Table S5, Supporting information), a higher number of chromosomes segregating without a detectable crossover and a reduced recombination rate (Fig. 1). Altogether, this suggests several genetic incompatibilities in the WA · WE hybrid, resulting in a lack of crossover interference and increased chromosomal nondisjunction (Sym & Roeder 1994) causing partial reproductive isolation. Genetic incompatibilities have recently been described in other organisms, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, where two lines showed divergent evolution in two paralogous genes resulting in postzygotic reproductive isolation (Bikard et al. 2009). The other cross with low crossover counts (WA · SA) did not show any of these patterns and hence may retain crossover interference, indicating a unique incompatibility affecting only the recombination landscape (Table S5, Supporting information).
Recombination is essential to ensure correct chromosomal segregation and enhance diversity by reshuffling the genes of the parents in the offspring. S. cerevisiae is an established model for the study of recombination (Barton et al. 2008; Lichten & Goldman 1995; Mancera et al. 2008) and has an average of 90 crossovers per meiosis with many of them at preferential sites (Mancera
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
YEAST COMPLEX TRAITS 1409
(a)
Chromosome XIII-R
(b) 30 °C
40 °C
     YPS128 DBVPG6044
YPS128 DBVPG6044
YMR317W
YMR317W
Unassembled
Subtelomere
Subtelomere
Subtelomere
Subtelomere
X
X
X
  DIA1
      X
 DIA1
YMR317W
      DIA1
      DIA1
URA3
X
   YPS128
DBVPG6044   YMR317W
 DIA1
URA3
X
    DIA1
 Fig. 6 Reciprocal hemizygosity of chromosome XIII subtelomere. (a) Schematic diagram of the adapted reciprocal hemizygosity approach for deletion of the subtelomeric regions in the hybrid WA · NA using URA3 as marker. X indicates the core X sequence and arrows the TG1-3 telomere repeats. (b) Growth differences between hybrid wild-type and hemizygous deletion of chromosome XIII subtelomere. Temperature growth plating assay validated a major heat-sensitive QTL present in the WA background.

1410 F. A. CUBILLOS ET AL.
et al. 2008). We compared the recombination landscape in the different lineages with a previously characterized cross (Mancera et al. 2008). Our results suggest that major hotspots are mostly conserved between multiple populations (Table S7, Supporting information); nevertheless, a significant number are active in unique cross-combinations supporting the idea of a flexible distribution of meiotic recombination events (Szekvolgyi & Nicolas 2007). Recent analysis of population genomics data indicated that major recombination hotspots in chromosome III are highly conserved between S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus (Tsai et al. 2010). These results agree with a recent study in Plasmodium falciparum, which indicates conservation of hotand coldspots among diverged populations (Mu et al. 2010).
We measured three quantitative growth traits in 23 different environments. Some of these stresses, like copper, have been suggested to explain the selection of specific alleles in strains used in wine fermentation (Fay et al. 2004; Mortimer 2000). The traits and environmental conditions we measured are likely to be relevant to the ecology and fitness of the species given that yeast spend part of their life cycle in these conditions (Landry et al. 2006). Perhaps equally important is the ability to survive under starvation conditions (chronological lifespan). Future studies on yeast ecology will allow laboratory experiments to be designed that can reproduce natural environmental conditions more closely, incorporating heterogeneous environments and complex microbial interaction.
Linkage analysis allowed us to detect 82 genetic intervals affecting quantitative growth variation in perturbed environmental conditions contributing to adaptive differentiation (Table S9, Supporting information). This count is a conservative estimate of the number of QTLs detected as it does not include neighbouring markers, linked QTLs (frequently detected in yeast) (Ben-Ari et al. 2006; Steinmetz et al. 2002), and count as a single interval those detected in multiple crosses or affecting distinct aspects of the growth curve for the same environmental condition. On average, 6.3 QTLs were found in environments analysed in all six combinations (Table S9, Supporting information). Previous studies using single crosses detected a lower number of QTLs per trait (Gerke et al. 2009; Sinha et al. 2008), demonstrating that the multiparent cross is a powerful approach for detecting multiple independent QTLs. Moreover, we show that some QTLs only contribute to specific aspect of the growth phenotype (adaptation, rate and efficiency) with little impact on other variables, emphasizing the importance of resolving fitness into its underlying components. None of the significant intervals detected were present in more than 20% of the traits (Fig. 5), suggesting limited pleiotropy in contrast
to the QTL hotspots reported in the BY · RM cross (Ehrenreich et al. 2009). This lack of pleiotropy indicates that the QTLs detected here are environment specific rather than affecting mitotic cell growth per se, a trait likely to be under strong selection. Indeed, association studies in A. thaliana detected associated regions shared between multiple flowering phenotypes, with a weak environmental interaction (Atwell et al. 2010).
How genetic architectures vary across populations is a prominent question in quantitative genetic studies (Ehrenreich et al. 2009). Linkage analysis of the same trait in different crosses revealed that the majority of QTLs are specific to a single cross-combination (Fig. 4), indicating that multiple cross-combination experiments detect a higher number of QTLs compared to the conventional two-parent cross. Furthermore, a quarter of the QTLs detected in multiple crosses have a strong phenotypic effect (Table S9, Supporting information). This agrees with a recently described allele of CYS4 in the M22 strain that has a large effect on sensitivity to active pharmacological compounds when crossed to two unrelated strains (Kim & Fay 2007). The higher number of context-dependent associations found here suggests that QTLs are highly dependent on the genetic background with many epistatic effects modulating allelic interactions (Mackay et al. 2009).
We found high levels of phenotypic transgressions in crosses between parental strains with similar phenotypes in all three environmental conditions (Fig. 2). Moreover, the highest number of QTLs was detected in crosses involving parents with similar phenotypes for paraquat tolerance (Table S9, Supporting information). This phenotypic variation in the segregants indicates the presence of distinct allelic variants, many with antagonistic effects, in the founder strains that evolved under weak selection during adaptation to specific environments. These results offer a plausible explanation for why the mosaic S. cerevisiae strains were selected for traits related to human activity (Fay & Benavides 2005; Legras et al. 2007; Liti et al. 2009a; Schacherer et al. 2009).
Subtelomeres have a complex dynamic architecture (Pryde & Louis 1997) with elevated rates of epigenetic regulation and recombination (Barton et al. 2008; Pryde & Louis 1999). We found that a third of the QTLs detected mapped to subtelomeric regions, explaining most of the phenotypic variance for conditions like heat and arsenite (Table S9–11, Supporting information). These results suggest that subtelomeres play a key role in defining individual quantitative variation and support their importance in adaptive evolution (Liti et al. 2005), in contrast to observations from knockout phenotypes where only a few deletions were found to have a phenotype (Ericson et al. 2006). Moreover, segregation
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

of nonsyntenic subtelomeric genes is a potential source of phenotypic diversity even within subpopulations (Cubillos, unpublished results). Recently, it has been shown how genomic rearrangements within subtelomeres could lead to niche adaptations owing to rapid allelic divergence (Brown et al. 2010; Wenger et al. 2010). The selection of traits and environmental conditions analysed here is likely to have had an impact in detecting subtelomeres as a primary cause of individual variation. More critical traits, such as DNA repair (Demogines et al. 2008), telomere length regulation (Gatbonton et al. 2006) and mitochondrial genome stability (Dimitrov et al. 2009), are more likely to be regulated by genes that reside in less dynamic genomic regions. This highlights a limitation of current genomewide association studies in higher organisms because subtelomeric regions are underrepresented. Finally, this multiparent approach provides a powerful new tool for dissecting complex traits by creating an artificial population of wild isolates. Future studies will help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of causative segregating sites and how they vary within natural populations.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Brookfield, A. Davison, C. Nieduszynski, I. Roberts and S. Sharp for comments and suggestions and A. Mott and P. Tennant for technical help. Work in Nottingham (FC, EB, PF, EJL and GL) was supported by The Wellcome Trust (WT084507MA), the Royal Society, the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBF0152161), the Genetics Society (Heredity Fieldwork Grant, Genetics Society UK, to FC) and Becas Chile (to FC). JW, EZ, AB and SO were supported by the Norwegian eScience program (eVITA) (RCN grant no. NFR178901⁄V30). LP was supported by The Wellcome Trust (WT077192⁄Z⁄05⁄Z).
References
Ó 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
YEAST COMPLEX TRAITS 1411
