  A phylogenetic and morphologic context for the radiation of
an endemic fauna in a long-lived lake: Corbulidae (Bivalvia; Myoida) in the Miocene Pebas Formation of western Amazonia
Author(s) :Laurie C. Anderson, Frank P. Wesselingh, and Joseph H. Hartman Source: Paleobiology, 36(4):534-554. 2010.
Published By: The Paleontological Society
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1666/09028.1
URL: http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1666/09028.1
BioOne (www.bioone.org) is a nonprofit, online aggregation of core research in the biological, ecological, and environmental sciences. BioOne provides a sustainable online platform for over 170 journals and books published by nonprofit societies, associations, museums, institutions, and presses.
Your use of this PDF, the BioOne Web site, and all posted and associated content indicates your acceptance of BioOne’s Terms of Use, available at www.bioone.org/page/ terms_of_use.
Usage of BioOne content is strictly limited to personal, educational, and non-commercial use. Commercial inquiries or rights and permissions requests should be directed to the individual publisher as copyright holder.
       BioOne sees sustainable scholarly publishing as an inherently collaborative enterprise connecting authors, nonprofit publishers, academic institutions, research libraries, and research funders in the common goal of maximizing access to critical research.

Paleobiology, 36(4), 2010, pp. 534–554
A phylogenetic and morphologic context for the radiation of an endemic fauna in a long-lived lake: Corbulidae (Bivalvia; Myoida) in the Miocene Pebas Formation of western Amazonia
Laurie C. Anderson, Frank P. Wesselingh, and Joseph H. Hartman
Abstract.—The Corbulidae are one of a handful of a primarily marine bivalve clades that exhibit a remarkable radiation, marked by increased species richness and divergent morphologies, within a long-lived lake. For corbulids, this diversification occurred within the lower to middle Miocene Pebas Formation of western Amazonia. Only one taxon associated with this radiation (Anticorbula) remains extant. We conducted a series of phylogenetic analyses to characterize diversification of Corbulidae within the Pebas Formation and relate that diversification to geologically older freshwater corbulids from the Paleocene Fort Union Formation of the northern Great Plains (United States). We used these results, as well as a quantitative examination of morphospace occupation, to infer whether Pebasian corbulids represent a true species flock, and whether the lacustrine system represented by the Pebas Formation represents a cradle of, or reservoir for, freshwater corbulid diversity. We conducted two sets of phylogenetic analyses using shell morphology characters. A genus-level data set incorporated type species of freshwater corbulid genera, any Paleocene representatives of these genera, and selected brackish and marine corbulid genera. A species-level analysis added all described freshwater corbulid taxa to the genus-level matrix. Our results were highly resolved (few most-parsimonious trees), but not particularly robust (low branch support). For the genus-level matrix, we used a taxon jackknife procedure to explore the effects of taxon sampling on tree stability and topology. Jackknife results recover a subclade of freshwater taxa (including both Anticorbula and Pachydon species and the Paleocene Ostomya sp.) in 92.4% of trees, although placement of this subclade across the ingroup varies, as do the topologic positions of other freshwater species. Freshwater and marine corbulids also are morphologically distinct from each other, a factor that likely reduced the robustness of our phylogenetic results. By combining these results with paleoecologic, stratigraphic, and morphologic data, we infer that freshwater corbulids arose once within the family, prior to the Cenozoic, with three distinct freshwater lineages present at their first appearance in the late Paleocene of North America. Within the Miocene Pebas system of South America, we reconstruct supralimital morphologic evolution within three lineages as freshwater taxa became variously adapted to the fluid, dysoxic muds characterizing lake-bottom facies representative of the Pebas lacustrine system. In addition, corbulids apparently successfully coped with high predation pressures from co-occurring shellcrushing predators. Finally, we consider that freshwater Corbulidae were primarily fluvial taxa throughout their geologic history, with a relatively ephemeral radiation within the Pebasian lake system, thus making the Pebasian system a cradle of diversity for several corbulid lineages.
Laurie C. Anderson. Department of Geology and Geophysics, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803. E-mail: glande@lsu.edu
Frank P. Wesselingh. Naturalis, Post Office Box 9517, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail: wesselingh@naturalis.nnm.nl
Joseph H. Hartman. Department of Geology and Geological Engineering, University of North Dakota, 81 Cornell Street Stop 8358, Grand Forks, North Dakota 58202. E-mail: joseph.hartman@und.edu
Accepted: 28 January 2010
Introduction
The aquatic fauna of the modern Amazon River drainage is deservedly famous for several reasons, not the least of which is a megadiverse teleost fish fauna, especially within the Characiformes (e.g., piranhas) and Siluriformes (catfishes), as well as the presence of taxa and clades whose closest relatives are marine (e.g., stingrays, needlefishes, and anchovies; Lovejoy et al. 2006). In comparison, the modern aquatic molluscan
fauna of the Amazon Basin is generally considered far less distinctive, with a relatively low abundance and low to moderate diversity (e.g., Ram ́ırez et al. 2003; Simone 2006; Strong et al. 2008). Characteristic aquatic taxa include the amphibious Ampullariidae (apple snails) and three families of Unionoida (Mycetopodidae, Hyriidae, and Etheriidae).
During the early to middle Miocene (ca. 24– 11 Ma), however, western Amazonia harbored an aquatic molluscan fauna unlike the
’ 2010 The Paleontological Society. All rights reserved.
0094-8373/10/3604–0002/$1.00

 FIGURE 1.
bearing reported freshwater Corbulidae. The relative size of each circle roughly corresponds to the outcrop area of these units. Williston Basin (USA): Paleocene Fort Union Formation; Magdalena Basin (Colombia): lower Miocene Colorado and Santa Teresa Formations, lower Miocene La Cira beds; Putumayo Basin (Colombia): La Tagua beds; Eastern Venezuelan Basin (Venezuela): lower Miocene Chaguaramas Formation, Pliocene Las Piedras Formation.
riverine-dominated assemblages of the modern Amazon drainage. During this time, diverse endemic groups occurred in a large (.106 km2) lacustrine-dominated system located in Andean foreland basins and adjacent pericratonic and intracratonic areas (Fig. 1) (Nuttall 1990; Wesselingh 2006a; Wesselingh and Salo 2006). The Pebas Formation of Peru and related sediments in Brazil, Ecuador, and Colombia were deposited in this lake-dominated system. Faunal assemblages in the Pebas Formation are composed primarily of cochliopid gastropods (the most diverse family with 86 species; Wesselingh 2006b) and corbulid bivalves (the most abundant family; Wesselingh 2007). In total, 21 species in six genera of freshwater Corbulidae have been described from the Pebas Formation (Wesselingh 2006b), with two additional species in stratigraphically lower freshwater Miocene sediments that crop out from central Peru to eastern Venezuela (Fig. 1) (Wesselingh and Macsotay 2006). In addition, anoth-
er corbulid species occurs in brackish-water incursion intervals within the Pebas Formation (Vermeij and Wesselingh 2002; Wesselingh 2006b).
Often considered endemic to the Neogene of South America (e.g., Nuttall 1990; although see Meek 1876), freshwater corbulids were thought to represent a ‘‘typical’’ example of an endemic radiation in a long-lived lake, characterized by rapid adaptive speciation within a colonizing lineage, in a manner analogous to colonization and speciation of terrestrial flora and fauna on oceanic islands. Certainly, within the Pebas Formation corbulid morphology is quite variable and can be highly divergent from marine family members (Fig. 2) (Nuttall 1990; Wesselingh 2006a). In fact, previous workers placed the freshwater genera Ostomya and Anticorbula in either the Corbulidae (Heterodonta [Nuttall 1990; Leistikow and Janssen 1997; Anderson et al. 2006; Wesselingh 2006b]) or Lyonsiidae (Anomalodesmata [Morrison 1943; Vokes 1945; Simone 1999]). Morphologic disparity within freshwater Corbulidae can be readily tied to specific habitat conditions or trophic roles and, therefore, may be interpreted as adaptive (Wesselingh 2006a, 2007). A preliminary phylogenetic study, however, implied that freshwater Corbulidae may have arisen from multiple lineages, some with evolutionary histories that predate the Pebas Formation by 50 Myr (Anderson et al. 2006).
Recent work on a number of freshwater clades indicates that endemic faunas in longlived lakes arise via multiple evolutionary pathways. For instance, Scho ̈ n and Martens (2004) reviewed both adaptive (niche diversification) and nonadaptive (sexual selection, hybridization, or chromosomal modification) components of cladogenesis in these lacustrine radiations (see also Salzburger 2009). In addition, endemic faunas are not necessarily monophyletic. For instance, whereas East African cichlid fishes in Lakes Malawi and Victoria are monoor diphyletic, those in Lake Tanganyika arose from the simultaneous diversification of at least seven colonizing ancestors (Salzburger and Meyer 2004; Koblmu ̈ ller et al. 2008). In addition, long-lived lakes may serve either as cradles (sites of
Location map of basins with stratigraphic units
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 535

536 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
 FIGURE 2. Morphologic disparity in freshwater Corbulidae. A–D, Corbula sulcata, Recent, west Saharan Africa, type species of Corbula provided as an exemplar of marine Corbulidae; A, B, Left valve, length 5 25 mm, 32.7, 31.3, respectively; C, D, Right valve, length 5 26.3 mm, 32.2, 31.1, respectively. E, I, J, Pachydon erectus, Miocene, Pebas Formation, Peru; E, Articulated valves, width (both valves) 5 36 mm, 30.8; I, J,: Left valve, length 5 20.3 mm, 30.9. F– H, Pachydon obliquus, Miocene, Pebas Formation; F, Left valve, length 5 13 mm, 32.5; G, Left valve, length 5 11.5 mm, 32.6; H, Articulated valves, length 5 11.7 mm, 32.6. K, P, Ostomya myiformis, Miocene, Pebas Formation, left valve, length 5 22.9 mm, 31.5. L, Q, Pachydon telliniformis, Miocene, Pebas Formation; L, Articulated valves, length 5 15 mm, 32; Q, Right valve, length 5 10.2 mm, 33.3. M, N, R, Concentricavalva concentrica, Miocene, Pebas Formation; M, Right valve hinge, length 5 7.7 mm, 33.1; N, Left valve hinge, length 5 8.9 mm, 33.4; R, Left valve (internal view), length 5 15.8 mm, 32.1. O, S, T, Exallocorbula dispar, Miocene, Pebas Formation; O, Right valve, length 5 13.1 mm, 32.7; S, Articulated valves, length 5 13 mm, 32.6; T, Left valve, length 5 14.1 mm, 32.6. U, Anticorbula sinuosum, Recent, Suriname, articulated specimen in wood, bivalve length , 28 mm; ,31.
diversification, as in East African cichlids and Lake Tanganyika crabs [Marijnissen et al. 2006; Salzburger and Meyer 2004; Koblmu ̈ ller et al. 2008]) or reservoirs (refugia for lineages, as in thalassoid gastropods of Lake Tanganyika [Wilson et al. 2004]) of diversity. In fact, in a review of Neogene lakes of central and southeastern Europe, Harzhauser and Mandic (2008) inferred that high endemic diver-
sity resulted from a combination of autochthonous evolution and accumulation of taxa ‘‘inherited’’ from older lacustrine systems. Further, for some gastropod lineages in Lakes Baikal, Tanganyika, and Ohrid, and for the Ponto-Caspian crustacean Paramysis, lineage divergence significantly predates lake formation, and/or lake colonization does not coincide with accelerated speciation rates

(Hausdorf et al. 2003; Wilson et al. 2004; Glaubrecht and Strong 2007; Audzijonyte et al. 2008; Hauswald et al. 2008).
Despite spectacular radiations of bivalves in both fossil and recent long-lived lakes (see review in Wesselingh 2007), these radiations generally have not been examined in a phylogenetic context, with the exceptions of recent molecular work on Ponto-Caspian dreissenids (Therriault et al. 2004; Albrecht et al. 2007) and Sphaeriidae in Lakes Ohrid and Prespa (Schultheiß et al. 2008a). In this paper, we expand on previous analyses that included freshwater corbulid taxa (Anderson et al. 2006) to more fully characterize the diversification of Corbulidae in the Pebas Formation, and to relate that diversification to geologically older freshwater corbulids from the Paleocene Fort Union Formation of the northern Great Plains (United States) (Fig. 1). Reconstructing phylogenetic relationships among freshwater corbulids is complicated by the fact that only one freshwater genus, Anticorbula, has extant representatives. Therefore, we undertook a series of phylogenetic analyses using morphologic data of the shell to examine the relationships among freshwater corbulids within the Neogene of South America, between Paleocene and Neogene freshwater Corbulidae, and among freshwater, brackish, and marine taxa of Corbulidae that are morphologically, geographically, ecologically, and/or stratigraphically overlapping. We also quantitatively examined patterns of morphospace occupation among these corbulids, and we combined those data with our phylogenetic results to reconstruct patterns of morphologic evolution in freshwater corbulids.
Materials and Methods
Ingroup Selection.—Two data sets were used in phylogenetic analyses. A genus-level analysis of 26 ingroup taxa was conducted to determine the phylogenetic position(s) of named freshwater genera within the Corbulidae. In addition to the type species of each freshwater genus (Anticorbula, Exallocorbula, Pachydon, Ostomya, Concentricavalva, and Pachyrotunda), the Paleocene species Pachydon mactriformis, Anticorbula sp., and Ostomya sp. were
incorporated. The Pebasian brackish-water Corbula cotuhensis also was included, as were representatives of genera that occur in (1) the Neogene of the western Atlantic, (2) the Cretaceous to Oligocene of the Gulf Coast and Great Plains of North America, and (3) brackish-water environments today. See Supplementary Table S1 online at http://dx.doi. org/10.1666/09028.s1 for a list of all taxa analyzed and their habitats, as well as reason(s) for incorporation of each into the analysis. For a species-level analysis of Pebasian taxa, 18 species (14 Pachydon, two Anticorbula, and two Ostomya) were added to the genus-level matrix, so that all named Neogene freshwater corbulids from western Amazonia are represented. Once constructed, matrices were examined for redundant taxa using safe taxonomic reduction as implemented in the software TAXEQ3 (Wilkinson 1995; see Supplementary Material for additional information).
Outgroup Selection.—Mya arenaria (Myidae; Myoidea) and Mesodesma corneum (Mesodesmatidae; Mactroidea) were selected as outgroup taxa as a result of preliminary analyses that explored the effects of these species plus three additional taxa on tree stability. The other species examined were the veneroids Callista laevigata (Pitarinae) and Tivela mactroides (Meretricinae), and the mactroid Ervilia nitens (Mesodesmatidae). Representatives of the Myidae, Mactroidea, and Veneroidea were initially selected because both morphologic and molecular evidence supports the Corbulidae and Myidae as sister taxa and the placement of this clade either nested within or as a sister group to part of the Veneroida (including Veneroidea, Mactroidea, Arcticoidea, or Corbiculoidea) (Bernard 1895, 1897; Purchon 1990; Starobogatov 1992; Adamkewicz et al. 1997; Waller 1998; Campbell 2000; Steiner and Hammer 2000; Canapa et al. 2001; Giribet and Wheeler 2002; Dreyer et al. 2003; Taylor et al. 2007). Although consistent with these studies, the phylogenies of Dryer et al. (2003) and Taylor et al. (2007) incorporate Myidae + Corbulidae into a larger clade with members of the ecologically specialized Pholadidae, Teredinidae, Dreissiniidae, and Sphaeriidae. Callista, Tivella, and Ervilia were
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 537

538 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
subsequently eliminated from our analyses because their inclusion did not alter topographic configurations but did decrease nodal support, especially at the base of the ingroup.
Characters.—A total of 88 characters were incorporated into both matrices (matrices available in Supplementary Table S2 and can be accessed via Dryad (www.datadryad.org). All characters are conchologic and describe external features that include radial and commarginal ornament, escutcheon, and lunule; valve shape; the hinge and other aspects of valve articulation; pallial line and sinus; and muscle scars (see Suppl. Table S3 for character descriptions). Matrices were examined for non-independence of characters (see Supplementary Material for details), and characters states of all characters were treated as unordered and were equally weighted.
Some authors perceive conchologic characters as less reliable than those based on soft anatomy because of higher incidences of homoplasy (e.g., Harasewych 1984; Giokas 2000; Wagner 2001). Nonetheless, conchologic characters can yield highly resolved cladograms (Vermeij and Carlson 2000; Roopnarine 2001; Schneider and Carter 2001; Wagner 2001; Anderson and Roopnarine 2003; Anderson et al. 2006). In these studies, reliable characters range from potentially more consistent hinge-tooth morphologies (for bivalves) to possibly more homoplaseous sculptural characters. At low taxonomic levels, however, many of these characters are synapomorphic and congruent in a number of distinct clades (Vermeij and Carlson 2000; Miller 1999; Roopnarine 2001; Anderson and Roopnarine 2003; Cuezzo 2003; Anderson et al. 2006; Malaquias and Reid 2008).
Phylogenetic Analyses.—Phylogenetic analyses were conducted in PAUP* 4.0b10 (Swofford 2002). In all analyses, maximum parsimony and outgroup polarization were used. Analyses consisted of heuristic searches using random addition (1000 replicates) to add taxa to developing trees and tree bisection-reconnection (TBR) for branch swapping.
We used both bootstrapping (Felsenstein 1985) and Bremer decay indices (Bremer 1988, 1994; Ka ̈llersjo ̈ et al. 1992) to evaluate the
robustness of cladogram nodes. Our bootstrap analyses used 1000 bootstrap replicates of heuristic searches that each used 100 random addition replicates. Simple weighting (characters sampled with equal probability) was enforced in all analyses. We constructed decay files for Bremer analyses in MacClade (using the Decay Index PAUP File option, specifying heuristic searches with the same configuration as above), which were executed in PAUP*.
We evaluated the phylogenetic signal in our matrices by calculating skewness (g1) of tree-length distributions for topologies (Hillis and Huelsenbeck 1992) produced in our analyses. Skewness was computed in PAUP* using the RandTrees option with 10,000 replicates. The g1 statistic tests for a significant phylogenetic signal in the matrix, but does not provide statistical support for the topologies produced from any particular analysis.
In order to explore the effects of taxon sampling on tree stability and topology, the genus-level matrix also was subjected to a taxon jackknife procedure similar to that in Cobbett et al. (2007), in which each taxon in turn is deleted and a phylogenetic analysis conducted (i.e., a priori taxon deletion). Results of each jackknife iteration were compared with those from the full genuslevel analysis (with the appropriate taxon pruned a posteriori). Additional details on how these results are documented and evaluated are available in the Supplementary Material.
Morphospace Analysis.—Because many of the morphologically more variant species of freshwater corbulids are rare and/or preserved primarily as fragmentary remains, we did not attempt a morphometric approach to explore morphospace occupation. To examine differences in morphospace occupation among freshwater, brackish, and marine corbulids, we instead used the discrete character states that were used in the species-level data matrix. We did this by calculating a pairwise dissimilarity matrix for all ingroup taxa, using a script in Octave (P. D. Roopnarine personal communication 2009). To calculate dissimilarity for any two taxa

when using unordered data, character states that match are scored as 0 (zero) and those that mismatch are scored as 1. Missing data are not considered. The sum of dissimilarities between any two taxa is divided by the number of characters, less any characters with data missing in one or both taxa, to produce a dissimilarity value.
Differences in median pairwise character dissimilarity and the coefficient of variation (CV; the ratio of a sample’s standard deviation to its mean, or relative variation) for dissimilarity values were compared among freshwater, brackish, and marine taxa. Average (or median) pairwise character dissimilarity is a commonly used and robust metric of morphologic variation (Foote 1997; Ciampaglio et al. 2001; Erwin 2007). We used a Kruskal-Wallace test (a nonparametric ANOVA) to test for significant differences among medians for the three groups, and MannWhitney post hoc tests (with Bonferroni adjustments to account for multiple comparisons) used to detect pairwise significant differences. Fligner-Kileen tests were used to test for significant differences in CV values (with the decision rule adjusted to a , 0.01 to account for multiple comparisons). All statistical tests were performed in PAST (Hammer et al. 2001).
To visualize patterns of morphologic variation, the dissimilarity matrix was used in a principal coordinates analysis (PCO) in PAST (Hammer et al. 2001). PCO is an ordination technique commonly used in disparity studies, especially those relying on discrete characters and, thus, non-Euclidean distance measures (e.g., Foote 1994; Wills et al. 1994).
Results: Genus-Level Analysis
A heuristic search of the 28-taxon 3 88character matrix produced four most-parsimonious trees (MPTs) with a tree length of 604 steps. (See Suppl. Table S5 for additional tree metrics.) The Stratigraphic Consistency Index (SCI; the ratio of nodes without stratigraphic conflict to the total number of resolved ingroup nodes) is low (0.45), largely because marine taxa with first appearances in the Mesozoic are placed in derived positions
on the MPTs. Tree-length distributions were left skewed and g1 (20.598) exceeded the critical valve for p , 0.01 (Hillis and Huelsenbeck 1992), indicating significant phylogenetic structure in the character matrix. The strict consensus of the four MPTs, along with bootstrap ($50%) and Bremer ($2) values, is illustrated in Figure 3. A narrative summary of character support for nodes associated with freshwater species is available in the Supplementary Material.
In the strict consensus of the four MPTs, freshwater genera are concentrated at or near the base of the consensus tree. For example, Concentricavalva was basal for the ingroup (Fig. 3). In addition, a subclade of freshwater taxa (here termed ‘‘CFC’’ for core freshwater clade, and including both species of Anticorbula and of Pachydon, as well as the Paleocene Ostomya sp.) is located one node above that of Concentricavalva. Further, Ostomya papyria occurs either at the base of the CFC or one node above it. Two genera (Exallocorbula and Pachyrotunda) and the Pebasian brackish-water Corbula cotuhensis, however, each take up more derived positions on the consensus tree.
Examining Topologic Stability.—The results of the genus-level analysis have high resolution (i.e., relatively few MPTs), but are not particularly robust (i.e., very few nodes have high bootstrap or Bremer support). Tree stability is discussed extensively in the literature, particularly the effect of missing data on both the number of MPTs and measures of node stability, as well as the effect of taxonomic sampling on long-branch attraction (e.g., Graybeal 1998; Zwickl and Hillis 2002; Giribet 2003; Wiens 2003; Wilkinson 2003; Miller and Hormiga 2004; Cobbett et al. 2007; Carlson and Fitzgerald 2008).
When phylogenetic results are not stable, many proposed methods to build more robust tree configurations advocate removing taxa deemed unstable. Such wildcard taxa, because they are equally likely to occupy multiple positions in a topology, increase the number of MPTs, even if a tree configuration is otherwise stable. Wildcard behavior is often explicitly or implicitly attributed to taxa with a large proportion of missing data, and, in
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 539

540 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
 FIGURE 3. Strict consensus of four MPTs resulting from a heuristic analysis of the genus-level data set. Nodes with bootstrap values $50% (above) and/or with Bremer indices $2 (below) are labeled. The core freshwater clade (CFC) is labeled and denoted by a patterned box to the right of the consensus tree. This subclade is labeled for convenience of discussion and is not meant to imply a formal higher-level phylogeny.
fact, one common strategy to deal with putatively unstable taxa is to remove those with a high proportion of missing characters. This method has been criticized because (1) the cutoff for inclusion typically is arbitrary, (2) taxa with missing characters do not always behave as wildcards (and vice versa), and (3) incomplete taxa can have unique character combinations and nonredundant character
information valuable to tree reconstruction (i.e., they bisect long branches; see Anderson 2001; Kearney 2002; Kearney and Clark 2003; Wiens 2003; Butler and Upchurch 2007; Manos et al. 2007; Hermsen and Hendricks 2008).
Therefore, rather than using an arbitrary criterion to delete taxa, we used safe taxonomic reduction to see if redundant character

data among taxa might be present and serve as a source of topological instability in our results. We also conducted a taxon jackknife analysis to further explore topologic stability and constrain our inferences concerning the evolution of freshwater corbulid genera (results summarized in Suppl. Table S5, and in Suppl. Fig. S1 online at http://dx.doi.org/10. 1666/09028.s2). Using safe taxonomic reduction, we found that no taxa were redundant, and all retained unique phylogenetic information, in spite of high levels of missing data in some taxa (see Suppl. Table S4 for tallies of missing and uninformative data by species). Further, although a relationship between missing data and unstable taxa is often inferred in the literature, we found no relationship between the amount of missing data and the various metrics tabulated (Table S5). In fact, the correlation between the amount of missing data and, for instance, Dmin (r2 5 0.1279), MPTs (r2 5 0.06781), number of nodes resolved on the Adams consensus tree (r2 5 0.3088), TL (r2 5 0.03046), RI (r2 5 0.00483), and CI9 (r2 5 0.13086) were insignificant (p . 0.5) (see Supplementary Materials for explanation of metric abbreviations). In addition, we found that deletion of most taxa in the taxon jackknife analysis had minimal effect on tree topology and stability. In general, when configurations differed, the CFC typically maintained its cohesion, although its position within the ingroup varied. See Supplementary Material for additional information.
Results: Species-Level Analysis
When all named corbulid species from the Pebas Formation are added to the matrix, a heuristic analysis produces one MPT (Fig. 4). Tree-length distributions were left skewed and g1 (20.317) exceeded the critical valve at p , 0.01 (Hillis and Huelsenbeck 1992), indicating significant phylogenetic structure in the character matrix. In this tree, freshwater taxa dominate lower nodes, and marine taxa occur in two derived subclades. As in the genus-level analysis, SCI is low (0.425), primarily because of the placement of geologically ancient marine genera in derived positions on the MPT.
A comparison of the genus-level tree to a pruned species-level tree (see Suppl. Fig. S2 at http://dx.doi.org/10.1666/09028.s3) reveals low levels of topologic agreement (D 5 12). Conflict between the genus-level and pruned species-level trees, however, is similar to that seen in the genus-level taxon jackknife (as outlined in the Supplementary Material; see Suppl. Fig. S1). A safe taxonomic reduction analysis of the species matrix reveals that none of the 46 taxa are redundant, indicating that one or more of the added species introduced phylogenetic information that altered the topology.
Results: Morphospace Analysis
Median pairwise dissimilarity is highest in marine taxa and lowest in freshwater taxa (Table 1). Results of a Kruskal-Wallace test indicate that these dissimilarity values are significantly different among groups (H 5 63.61, p 5 1.5 3 10214), and post hoc MannWhitney tests indicate significant differences between marine and freshwater taxa (p 5 2.4 3 10214) and between marine and brackish taxa (p 5 0.003), but not between freshwater and brackish taxa (p 5 0.07). CV values, however, are highest for freshwater and lowest for marine taxa (Table 1). FlignerKilleen tests indicate that the CV of freshwater taxa is significantly larger than that of marine taxa (one-sided test, p 5 0.008), but other values are not significantly different (p 5 0.27 for freshwater versus brackish and p 5 0.05 for brackish versus marine).
The pattern of PCO scores may help illustrate the reasons for these results (Fig. 5). On the first three coordinate axes (CA), freshwater and marine taxa inhabit distinct areas of morphospace, whereas brackish-water taxa overlap with both of the other groups. In addition, marine taxa are more evenly dispersed through their range, whereas freshwater data plot in two distinct clouds of points. The smaller of these clouds, in the lower left of Figure 5, includes the four species of Anticorbula, as well as Concentricavalva concentrica. The even dispersion of marine species may reflect the sampling strategy for these taxa, which was to include exemplars of corbulids that overlap morpho-
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 541

542 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
 FIGURE 4. One MPT resulting from a heuristic analysis of the species-level data set. Nodes with bootstrap values $50% (above) and/or with Bremer indices $2 (below) are labeled.
TABLE 1. Median and coefficient of variation (CV) values logically, geographically, ecologically, or stra-
from pairwise dissimilarity matrix of all ingroup taxa binned by habitat.
tigraphically with freshwater species.
Discussion
Taxa from long-lived lakes tend to show extreme morphologic divergence, generally occupying morphospace well beyond that
  Habitat
Freshwater Brackish Marine
Median dissimilarity
0.385 0.446 0.541
CV
29.306 23.332 18.584
   
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 543
 FIGURE 5. Plot of Principal Coordinate Analysis scores. Coordinates 1 and 2 are plotted on the horizontal and vertical axes, respectively, and Coordinate 3 scores are indicated by symbol size and fill (see legend). Scores are binned by shape into freshwater, brackish, and marine taxa (see legend). The amount of variation represented by each axis cannot be determined because some eigenvalues in the analysis are negative, as a result of missing raw data values (Table S4) and the use of a non-Euclidean distance matrix.
typical of a given clade (e.g., Michel 1994; Harzhauser and Mandic 2004; Wesselingh 2007). We see this pattern of morphologic distinctness in freshwater Corbulidae (Fig. 5), where even traits that tend to be relatively conservative in bivalves, such as hinge features are highly modified (e.g., compare left valve hinges illustrated in Fig. 2). This level of morphologic distinctness might have contributed to the lack of robustness in our results, which may stem either from high divergence within the clade (inability to recognize homology, perhaps causing the polyphyly of Ostomya and Pachydon, Fig. 4) or from convergence between this and other bivalve clades (homoplasy, perhaps leading to the basal placement of morphologically disparate taxa such as Ostomya myiformis and Concentricavalva, Fig. 4). Nonetheless, significant phylogenetic signal is present in our matrices, and certain topologic patterns are common across MPTs. In Figure 6, we use those phylogenetic results as well as stratigraphic,
paleoecologic, and morphologic information to infer evolutionary relationships among freshwater corbulid lineages.
We infer, from their persistence (in 92.4% of MPTs from the taxon jackknife iterations) across most analyses of the CFC containing all three Paleocene species (Fig. 6), that freshwater Corbulidae arose once within the family. Although some authors consider Pachydon to be a brackish-water taxon (e.g., Cvancara 1966; Nuttall 1990; Belt et al. 2005), when they first occur in the fossil record (in the alluvial Paleocene Fort Union Formation) Pachydon, Anticorbula, and Ostomya had already made the transition into freshwater (Fig. 7). Evidence that these are freshwater species includes the association of Pachydon mactriformis with freshwater gastropods, including Lioplacodes (Pleuroceridae) and Campeloma (Viviparidae), as well as with fragmentary remains of unionoid bivalves, and freshwater ostracods (Anderson et al. 2006). In addition, the range of this genus may

544 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
 FIGURE 6. Summary of inferred evolutionary relationships among freshwater Corbulidae based on integrated phylogenetic, stratigraphic, paleoecologic, and morphologic data. Images not at same scale.
extend back to the Campanian Judith River Formation (Meek 1876), a fluvial and paludal unit (Hartman 1976; Cherven and Jacob 1985; Rogers 1998). Further, Paleocene Ostomya and Anticorbula are reported from a single locality and are associated with a diverse assemblage of freshwater snails, sphaeriid clams, and fragmentary remains of unionoids (Hartman 1993; Anderson et al. 2006). Corroborating geochemical evidence also suggests that these corbulids inhabited freshwater. Aragonitic shell samples have negative d18O values without seasonal positive excursions, indicating freshwater conditions without seasonal marine incursions, and Sr-isotope values indicative of continental conditions (Anderson et al. 2007; unpublished data from D. Dettman to Hartman 2008). Finally, the report by Cvancara (1966) of P. mactriformis from the Paleocene Cannonball Formation, a marine unit in North and South Dakota, cannot be substantiated because occurrences are not actually from this unit, are too poorly preserved to be identified with certainty, or
are lost from institutional collections, and thus cannot be re-identified (Hartman personal observation).
The position of freshwater Corbulidae within the family is not clear. The CFC falls in a variety of positions at or near the base of the ingroup, or in a derived position associated with members of a subclade including (Bothrocorbula + Caryocorbula) + Vokesula (see Figs. 3, S1). However, morphologic similarity and phylogenetic proximity of some brackishwater and freshwater corbulids may indicate an evolutionary affinity, as is common in many animal clades that invaded freshwater lakes (Park and Gierlowski-Kordesch 2007). In fact, a number the geologically oldest corbulids (the family first appears in the Jurassic) are brackish-water taxa (e.g., Jurassicorbula, Indocorbula, Rostrocorbula, and Hudsonina [see Yin and Fu ̈ rsich 1991, 1992; Yin et al. 1995; Fu ̈rsich et al. 2000; Harper et al. 2002]). Of these taxa, Hudsonina has been allied with Pachydon (Yin and Fu ̈rsich 1991, 1992). Hudsonina was not incorporated into

  FIGURE 7. Temporal and environmental distribution of species richness in freshwater corbulid genera. Habitats are abbreviated as follows: FLUV, fluvial and fluviolacustrine; MLAC, marginal (nearshore) lacustrine; LAC, lacustrine ramp and shelf; DYS, dysoxic lacustrine. Stratigraphic intervals as follows: Fort Union, upper Paleocene Fort Union Formation, Williston Basin (USA);
this study because available material was poorly preserved, and although its chondrophore and resilifer are similar to those seen in freshwater corbulids (e.g., Fig. 2F,G), it is more closely allied morphologically with Ursirivus. Molecular data from extant Anticorbula may provide an alternative data set to explore the higher-level phylogeny of the CFC within the Corbulidae as a whole.
We also infer that Neogene freshwater corbulid faunas from western Amazonia represent taxonomic diversifications within the Anticorbula, Pachydon, and Ostomya lineages, resulting in occupation of novel morphospace within the Pebas Formation (Fig. 5). This interpretation calls for long temporal and wide geographic gaps between the origins of freshwater Corbulidae and their Miocene radiation. Long evolutionary histories have, however, been inferred for other endemic lacustrine clades, including gastropods and crustaceans (Hausdorf et al. 2003; Wilson et al. 2004; Audzijonyte et al. 2008; but see Schultheiß et al. 2008b). In addition, recent phylogenetic work on freshwater rays from the Eocene Green River Formation (Wyoming) indicates that the origin of the monophyletic Potamotrygonidae of South America may have been in the Eocene or earlier (Carvalho et al. 2004; see also Brito and Deynat 2004). Further, examples of disjunct biogeographic patterns are not uncommon for Neotropical aquatic taxa. For instance, Lundburg et al. (2007) reported, on the basis of a phylogenetic analysis using two nuclearDNA sequences, that a distinctive Mesoamerican freshwater catfish, Lacantunia enigmatica, is derived from an African freshwater clade that postdates any Gondwanan connection.
r
La Cira/Chaguaramas, lower Miocene La Cira fauna, central Colombia and Chaguaramas Formation, Venezuela; Pebas-1, lower Miocene to lower middle Miocene (Psiladiporites-Crototricolpites pollen zone of Hoorn 1993) Pebas Formation, Peru; Pebas-2, middle Miocene (Crassoretitriletes pollen zone of Hoorn 1993) Pebas Formation, Peru; Pebas-3, upper middle to lower upper Miocene (Grimsdalea pollen zone of Hoorn 1993) Pebas Formation, Peru; Las Piedras, Pliocene Las Piedras Formation, Venezuela; Recent, extant occurrences, Amazon Basin and Atlantic drainages of the Guyanas.
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 545

546 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
Anticorbula is strongly supported as a subclade across analyses. On the basis of external morphology, an epifaunal, nestling habit (as seen in the living representatives of the genus, see Figs. 2U, 6) can be inferred for fossil representatives (Anderson et al. 2006). In other words, Anticorbula may be an atypical corbulid (it has, in fact, been placed in the Lyonsiidae by some authors), but Anticorbula species are distinct from other corbulids in morphologically similar ways (Fig. 5), likely because their ecology has not altered or diverged greatly over evolutionary time (Fig. 7).
Further, this genus may not have fully invaded and adapted to the lacustrine habitats represented by the Pebas Formation. Only two species of Anticorbula, A. mencheri and A. miocaenica, occur in the Pebas Formation, and both are found in fluvial and marginal lacustrine, not lake-bottom, depositional facies (Wesselingh 2006a) (Fig. 7). In addition, the stratigraphic range of both species extends beyond the Pebas Formation, with A. miocaenica found in apparently fluviolacustrine facies (i.e., the species co-occurs with corbiculid bivalves and pachychyilid gastropods) of the lower Miocene Chaguaramas Formation and A. mencheri present in the Pliocene Las Piedras Formation (a fluvial unit), both of the Eastern Venezuelan Basin (Fig. 1) (Wesselingh 2006a,b; Wesselingh and Macsotay 2006).
A monophyletic Pachydon subclade is not supported in our analyses. In the genus-level analysis, Pachydon is paraphyletic in the CFC (except in 7.6% of MPTs from the genus jackknife iterations in which the CFC itself is a paraphyletic grade). In the species-level analysis, most species assigned to this genus fell into one of two groups: (1) morphologically less divergent (and often, but not exclusively, stratigraphically older) species, and (2) Pebasian Pachydon species with highly modified hinge and external morphology. Nevertheless, transitional forms within and between species across time and/or space in the Pebas Formation (Wesselingh 2006a,b; Wesselingh et al. 2006) indicate that Pachydon most likely represents radiation(s) in a limited number of lineages. For instance, morphologic interme-
diates between Pachydon andersonae and P. tenuis, P. maaikeae and P. cuneatus, P. iquitensis and P. telliniformis, and possibly even Exallocorbula dispar and P. carinatus, are observed in various horizons within the Pebas Formation (Wesselingh personal observation).
Weak phylogenetic support for a monophyletic Pachydon may, in fact, relate to the spectacular radiation that members of this genus underwent in the Pebas lacustrine ecosystem. In the Pebas Formation, this genus possesses relatively high species diversity, dramatic morphologic divergence, marked endemicity, and unusual ecologic tolerances (i.e., to freshwater), all typical of ‘‘supralimital evolution’’ sensu Myers (1960). The geologically oldest Pachydon species in South America, P. hettneri, is found in fluviolacustrine facies of the Chaguaramas Formation (Eastern Venezuelan Basin), La Cira Beds and Santa Teresa Formation (Magdalena Basin, Colombia), and ‘‘lower’’ Pebas deposits (western Amazon Basin) (Figs. 1, 7) (Nuttall 1990; Wesselingh and Macsotay 2006). Most Pebasian Pachydon species, however, occupied fully lacustrine facies, representing offshore environments in which fluid, organic-rich mud and dysoxic conditions were common (Wesselingh 2006a). As reviewed by Wesselingh (2006a, 2007), Pachydon species show a variety of traits that can be inferred to be adaptations to fluid mud substrates, oxygen stress, and/or high predation rates. As an example, traits that include selective thickening of the anterior margin (in P. obliquus [Figs. 2F,G]), a distinct flattened lunular area (but not a true lunule [see Carter 1967] in P. erectus [Fig. 2E]), a right valve margin that extends well beyond that of the left (in P. obliquus [Fig. 2H] and also in Exallocorbula dispar [Fig. 2S]), or a twisted posterior to allow oblique or lateral burrowing (in P. telliniformis [Fig. 2L]) all can be viewed as adaptations to ‘‘floating’’ and maintaining a specific orientation in a semifluid substrate.
We also tentatively ally Exallocorbula with Pachydon (Fig. 6). This concavo-convex species exhibits wildcard behavior, and its highly divergent morphology may be complicating reconstruction of its phylogenetic position.

However, in the species-level tree it is sister to Pachydon erectus (Fig. 2E,I,J) and adjacent to the paraphyletic Pachydon grade. In addition, within the Pebas Formation, E. dispar shows a dramatic morphologic trend up-section, with the shell becoming less elongate and developing a more inflated right valve, a more concave left valve, and a larger and squarer cardinal tooth (Wesselingh 2006b: Figs. 338– 341). When coding morphology for our phylogenetic analyses, we used the stratigraphically younger, more extreme morph of E. dispar (e.g., Fig. 2O,S,T). The hinge of the older E. dispar morph, however, closely resembles that of P. amazonensis, and its valves are similar to those of P. ledaeformis in outline shape. In addition, early representatives of Pachydon carinatus are more elongate and somewhat bilobate and seem to converge in shell shape with Exallocorbula.
Exallocorbula dispar is common throughout the Pebas Formation, particularly in offshore lacustrine facies (Wesselingh 2006a) (Fig. 7). Morphologic features of this species indicate that it was fully adapted to lacustrine conditions. For instance, as noted by Wesselingh (2006a, 2007), the concavo-convex morphology of this species likely allowed individuals to ‘‘float’’ on a fluid mud substrate, as is inferred for the Jurassic gryphaeid oysters (Savazzi 1999). Further, some specimens of E. dispar possess a large medial muscle scar in addition to the anterior and posterior adductor scars (Fig. 2T). Wesselingh (2006a) hypothesized that the medial scar signifies the presence of mantle gills, like those of the chemosymbiotic lucinid bivalves, and may indicate that Exallocorbula also was chemosymbiotic. Certainly, chemosynthetic bacteria would have thrived in the organic-rich, dysoxic bottom conditions of the offshore lakebed facies.
For Ostomya spp., Pachyrotunda, and Concentricavalva, phylogenetic results are somewhat ambiguous. The Paleocene species placed in Ostomya has a prosogyrous umbo, a cardinal tooth/socket, and a chondrophore and resilifer pit with distinctly different morphologies (i.e., a hinge that resembles a ‘‘typical’’ corbulid more than seen in its geologically younger congeners). The less disparate morphology of Ostomya sp. (Fig. 6)
links it more clearly to Anticorbula and Pachydon mactriformis in the CFC.
The Miocene type species, Ostomya papyria, tends to fall within or adjacent to the CFC, although it exhibits wildcard behavior among analyses. Nonetheless, we consider this species to be part of the same lineage as Paleocene Ostomya (Fig. 6). Ostomya papyria has an interesting modification to the hinge that shows even greater expression in O. carinata and O. myiformis (Fig. 2P), as well as in Concentricavalva (Figs. 2M,N, 6) and Pachyrotunda (Fig. 6), thus causing us to tentatively ally these three genera (Fig. 6). In these species, the tooth is reduced or absent, and the ligament attachment changes shape and orientation. As a result, the chondrophore and resilifer pit become virtual mirror images as spoon-shaped features that extend below the hinge plate.
Whether or not they are closely related, Miocene Ostomya spp., Concentricavalva, and Pachyrotunda provide additional examples of supralimital evolution within the Pebas lacustrine system. All these taxa occur in lakebottom facies representing deposition in organic-rich, dysoxic, fluid mud (Fig. 7). The most extreme morphologies are found in Concentricavalva (Fig. 2R) and O. myiformis (Fig. 2K,P). The former, with its paper-thin shell, has a morphology and environmental distribution closely resembling that of Jurassic flat scallops in the Posidonidae (Wesselingh 2006a), whereas the latter is convergent on the morphology of the marine North Atlantic Mya truncata.
Finally, the brackish-water Corbula cotuhensis from the Pebas Formation does not display a stable topologic position among trees. Its position ranges from relatively derived, as a member of several subclades, to more basal positions (e.g., Fig. S1). Although the hinge of C. cotuhensis, especially the chondrophore, closely resembles that of Corbula s.s., its external morphology is highly divergent from that genus, leading to previous assignment of this taxon to Panamicorbula (e.g., Vermeij and Wesselingh 2002). At this time, therefore, we are unable to articulate an explicit hypothesis concerning the phylogenetic position of C. cotuhensis, except to state that the species
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 547

548 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
represents a lineage independent of freshwater corbulid genera.
In long-lived lakes, endemic radiations are often associated with niche diversification and predatory–prey interactions (i.e., escalation) (West and Cohen 1994, 1996; Martens 1997; Van Damme and Pickford 2003; Scho ̈n and Martens 2004; von Rintelen et al. 2004; Glaubrecht and von Rintelen 2008). Often, these morphologic radiations are associated with modifications of highly plastic, preadaptive traits, such as the pharyngeal jaw apparatus and tooth structures of East African cichlids (e.g., Salzburger and Meyer 2004), or the radula of Sulawesi pachychilid gastropods (Glaubrecht and von Rintelen 2008). Did the Corbulidae, whose marine members are generally considered to be morphologically conservative (although see Goodwin et al. 2008), possess such preadaptations that allowed them to successfully invade freshwater in the Mesozoic and radiate with abandon in the Miocene Pebas system? On the basis of ecologic and paleoecologic information (cited below), the family possesses the means and opportunity, both physiologic and morphologic, to first successfully invade and then diversify in limnic habitats.
As documented by Park and GierlowskiKordesch (2007), marine taxa have been the primary colonizers of lakes over evolutionary time, with estuaries serving as filters for successive independent invasions. Most corbulids, living and fossil, inhabit marginalto shallow-marine environments, with estuarine corbulids exhibiting remarkably wide environmental tolerances in both larval and adult stages. For instance, Potamocorbula amurensis reproduces under a wide range of salinity (0.1–33%) and temperature (6.4–23uC) conditions, and occurs in diverse sediment types (Carlton et al. 1990; Nicolini and Penry 2000; Parchaso and Thompson 2002; Werner et al. 2003). In addition, both adults and juveniles of Varicorbula gibba can survive hypoxic conditions for over 30 days (with adults under hypoxia exhibiting a higher survival rate than controls), and salinities of 0–16% for several days (Holmes and Miller 2006). Further, species such as Notocorbula crassa,
Caryocorbula caribaea, and V. gibba often dominate assemblages in areas with organicrich sediment, high turbidity, various types of pollution, and/or anoxia (Pearson 1971, 1972; Lande 1975; Lewy and Samtleben 1979; HRSBrenko 1981, 2006; Kiørboe and Møhlenberg 1981; Weigelt and Rumohr 1986; Jensen 1990; Morton 1990; Lamprell et al. 1998; Albertelli et al. 1999; Mohammed and Agard 2004; SolisWeiss et al. 2004). Such tolerances are documented across the family, so the ancestor of freshwater corbulid lineages likely was similarly eurytopic, which may have aided in the initial invasion of freshwater habitats.
Moreover, as in other long-lived lakes, such as the east African rift lakes (e.g., Vermeij and Covich 1978; West et al. 1991), the lacustrine ecosystem represented by the Pebas Formation included a number of shell-crushing predators, as indicated by the remains of sciaenid, myliobatiform, and serrasalmine fishes (Monsch 1998) and decapod crustaceans (Wesselingh and Ramos 2010). Wesselingh (2007) noted that predation scars are commonly encountered on Pachydon shells, especially in the posterior areas of valves. Thick shells (especially those thickened in the posterior portion of the shell), strong posterior ridges, inflated valves, thickened ventral margins, valve overlap related to the inequivalved condition, presence of a rostrum, and placement of the pallial line far from the ventral margin all may increase resistance to crushing and peeling predation in Pachydon (Wesselingh 2007). All these traits also can be observed in marine corbulids throughout their evolutionary history, and thus were likely inherited or derived from similar traits in the ancestor of freshwater corbulids.
Evidence for the presence of conchiolin sheets within the shell microstructure of freshwater corbulid valves, however, is equivocal. Layers of this protein-rich organic compound that constitutes the periostracum, as well as the matrix of the mineralized portion of mollusk shells, are common in brackish and marine corbulids (Lewy and Samtleben 1979; Harper 1994; Kardon 1998), and are reported from early members of the family (Jurassic Corbulomima [Kardon 1998]). Inferred functions for conchiolin layers in-

clude deterring drilling and crushing predation, retarding dissolution in waters undersaturated in calcium carbonate, and serving as a ‘‘gasket’’ between the left and right valves when the shell is tightly closed (Fischer 1963; Lewy and Samtleben 1979; De Cauwer 1985; Kelley 1988; Anderson 1992; Harper 1994; Kardon 1998). Although discontinuities in shell microstructure occur in some Pachydon species (Wesselingh unpublished data), a systematic evaluation of shell microstructure is needed to confirm the presence and document the extent of conchiolin layers in freshwater lineages.
The extent of niche diversification that occurred among Pebasian species is unclear, as most taxa occur in similar lake-bottom depositional facies (with the exception of Anticorbula spp., Fig. 7). Also unclear is which extrinsic trait(s) were critical in the initiation of any habitat specialization that did evolve among Pebasian corbulids. Intrinsic traits, such as brooding (of eggs or larvae), territoriality, or homing, also are thought to be critical in facilitating endemic radiations in long-lived lakes, as each limits geographic range and, therefore, increases the potential for speciation (Cohen and Johnston 1987; Michel 1994). The marine Corbulidae examined to date, however, are broadcast spawners, with free-swimming (veliger) larvae (Nicolini and Penry 2000; HRS-Brenko 2006 and references therein), as are dreissenids and cardiids, both of which underwent significant endemic radiations in the Neogene of the Ponto-Caspian (e.g., Jonsson et al. 1991; Mackie and Schloesser 1996; Larsen et al. 2007). Extant members of the veneroid family Corbiculidae, however, have a wide range of reproductive strategies, with free-swimming veliger larvae produced in brackish-water species (e.g., Polymesoda erosa and Corbicula japonica) and a variety of ovoviviparous and (eu)viviparous species in freshwater (e.g., C. fluminea, C. possoensis, C. linduensi, and Neocorbicula limosa) (Korniushin and Glaubrecht 2003 and references therein). As is common in a variety of clades radiating in long-lived lakes (Cohen and Johnston 1987), freshwater corbulids may have evolved a variety of brooding strategies. Unfortunately the larval
ecology of extant Anticorbula, the one surviving freshwater taxon, is as of yet unknown. Preservation of Pebas specimens can be spectacular, however, so it may be possible to infer larval mode from protoconch morphology.
A close phylogenetic affinity between Paleocene North American and Neogene South American freshwater corbulids requires a gap of about 50 Myr between stratigraphic occurrences. No freshwater corbulids of Eocene or Oligocene age are reported from the Americas, although several lacustrine faunas are well documented, including those of the Cretaceous to Eocene Sheep Pass Formation of Nevada (Good 1987), Paleocene Flagstaff Formation of Utah (La Rocque 1960), Eocene Green River and Wasatch Formations of Wyoming (Hanley 1977), Eocene/Oligocene Los Corros Formation of northern South America (Pilsbry and Olsson 1935), and lower Miocene Carbonera Formation of Colombia (Gomez et al. 2009). A similar gap is seen between Eocene occurrences of freshwater rays in the Green River Formation and Miocene occurrences of Potamotrygonidae species in South America (Brito and Deynat 2004; Antoine et al. 2007).
Because geologically older taxa occur in fluvial facies (i.e., Paleocene species and Pachydon hettneri) and because Anticorbula persists in those same environments throughout its geologic range (including its modern distribution), we infer that freshwater corbulids inhabited fluvial habitats prior to their radiation within the lacustrine-dominated Pebas Formation. In such facies, the preservation potential of these small, aragonitic shells would have been extremely low, thus accounting for the temporal gap in their record. The freshwater lineages, therefore, diversified only when they successfully invaded the lacustrine Pebas system with its distinctive fluid, anoxic bottom, and in this way they represent an endemic radiation, albeit polyphyletic, in a long-lived lake system.
Conclusions
Using phylogenetic, paleoecologic, stratigraphic, and morphologic information, we
EVOLUTION OF FRESHWATER CORBULIDAE 549

550 LAURIE C. ANDERSON ET AL.
reconstruct freshwater corbulids as an ancient clade with at least three long-lived lineages (represented by Anticorbula, Pachydon, and Ostomya). We infer that the Pebas corbulid fauna represents diversification within multiple lineages, accompanied by occupation of morphospace distinct from marine taxa, as corbulid taxa transitioned from fluvial habitats to the extensive lacustrine setting present in the Miocene of western Amazonia. In this sense, the Pebas system served as a cradle of freshwater corbulid diversity.
Further, we found that sensitivity analyses, such as taxon jackknife protocols, can provide data to explain node instability when resampling techniques such as bootstrapping indicate low nodal support across a clade. That said, we found that our jackknife results did not allow for unambiguous interpretation of the role that a particular taxon plays in topologic stability, as metrics to compare trees do not provide a consistent signal, likely because each assesses different aspects of phylogenetic results. Finally, we found no significant relationships between the amount of missing data and tree metrics computed for the jackknife analysis, reinforcing previous work demonstrating that incompletely coded taxa do not, by default, contribute to topologic instability.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank C. Hoorn (University of Amsterdam), M. Ra ̈sa ̈nen and J. Salo (University of Turku, Finland), L. Romero Pitman (Servicio Geolo ́gico, San Borja, Lima, Peru), and J. Guerrero and G. Sarmiento (Universidad Nacional, Bogota, Colombia) for enabling fieldwork in western Amazonia. We also thank the many landowners across western North Dakota and eastern Montana who have generously permitted J. Hartman access to their land over the many years of collecting data on corbulids and other mollusks. We appreciate the input of and insightful discussions with P. Roopnarine, D. Goodwin, A. Engel, and two reviewers. Thanks to P. Roopnarine for writing the Octave script and to J. Lorenzo for help with MATLAB. Various other individuals and institutions generously lent samples and specimens,
which were used directly or indirectly in this work, and the authors thank W. Allmon, Paleontological Research Institution; A. Baldinger, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University; P. Callomon, Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia; B. Hussaini, American Museum of Natural History; P. Jung, R. Panchaud, A. Heinz, and O. Schmidt, Naturhistorisches Museum Basel; J. Pickering, The Natural History Museum, London; R. Portell, Florida Museum of Natural History; J. Thompson, U.S. National Museum of Natural History; P. Valentich Scott, Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History; E. Vokes, Tulane University; and K. Westphal and E. Leslie, University of Wisconsin Madison Geology Museum. A portion of this research was supported by a Temminck Fellowship awarded by Naturalis (Leiden, The Netherlands) to L. Anderson.
Literature Cited
