Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 62 (2012) 555–560
     Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ympev
 Short Communication
Molecular phylogeny and biogeography of Malagasy frogs of the genus
Gephyromantis
Nathalie Kaffenberger a,b,c, Katharina C. Wollenberg d, Jörn Köhler a, Frank Glaw e, David R. Vieites f, Miguel Vences b,⇑
a Hessisches Landesmuseum Darmstadt, Friedensplatz 1, 64283 Darmstadt, Germany
b Zoological Institute, Technical University of Braunschweig, Mendelssohnstr. 4, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany
c Senckenberg Naturhistorische Sammlungen Dresden, Königsbrücker Landstr. 159, 01109 Dresden, Germany
d Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology and Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA e Zoologische Staatssammlung München, Münchhausenstr. 21, 81247 München, Germany
f Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), C/José Gutierrez Abascal 2, 28006 Madrid, Spain
 article info
Article history:
Received 25 April 2011
Revised 21 September 2011 Accepted 28 September 2011 Available online 10 October 2011
Keywords:
Amphibia Anura Mantellidae Gephyromantis Origin Dispersal Madagascar
1. Introduction
Tropical rainforests are by far the most species-rich regions for anurans. Among tropical frogs there is usually a considerable proportion of predominantly small, brownish species found in the leaf litter during the day or at more elevated positions in the vegetation at night. From an evolutionary point of view, several such groups of brownish tropical frogs evolved convergently and belong to unrelated lineages confined to major biogeographic realms: in South-East Asia in the families Ceratobatrachidae (genus Platymantis), Rhacophoridae (e.g., Philautus) and Megophryidae (e.g., Leptolalax), in the Neotropics in the Terrarana clade (e.g., Eleutherodactylus, Craugastor, Pristimantis), in Africa in the Arthroleptidae (Arthroleptis, Cardioglossa), and in Madagascar in the Mantellidae (Gephyromantis). Despite many morphological peculiarities characterizing single species or subclades, many of these terrestrial or scansorial frogs are morphologically very similar to each other. Taxonomically they ranged among the most poorly known groups
⇑ Corresponding author. Fax: +49 531 391 8198. E-mail address: m.vences@tu-bs.de (M. Vences).
1055-7903/$ see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2011.09.023
abstract
The genus Gephyromantis is a clade within the Malagasy–Comoroan family Mantellidae composed of rainforest frogs that live and breed to varying degrees independently from water. Based on DNA sequences of five mitochondrial and five nuclear genes we inferred the phylogeny of these frogs with full taxon coverage at the species level. Our preferred consensus tree from a partitioned Bayesian analysis of 5843 base pairs of 51 nominal and candidate species supports various major clades within the genus although the basal relationships among these remain unresolved. The data provide strong evidence for the monophyly of the subgenera Gephyromantis (after exclusion of Gephyromantis klemmeri), Laurentomantis, Vatomantis, and Phylacomantis. Species assigned to the subgenus Duboimantis belong to two strongly supported clades of uncertain relationships. G. klemmeri, previously in the subgenus Gephyromantis, was placed with high support sister to the Laurentomantis clade, and the Laurentomantis + G. klemmeri clade was sister to Vatomantis. A reconstruction of ancestral distribution areas indicates a diversification of several subgenera in the northern biogeographic regions of Madagascar and the dispersal out of northern Madagascar for several clades.
   Ó 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
of vertebrates until molecular approaches helped to organize the numerous species into families, genera and subgenera (e.g., Glaw and Vences, 2006; Hedges et al., 2008). In many cases these morphologically similar frogs represent old evolutionary lineages and may be characterized by large effective population sizes (Crawford, 2003). Many of them, furthermore, have endotrophic development, i.e. the embryos or non-feeding tadpoles develop in terrestrial nests or within the eggs (Thibaud and Altig, 1999), which might be a factor favoring their high species diversity (Dubois, 2004).
In Madagascar, small, brown leaf litter frogs are represented by species of the genus Gephyromantis. According to current classification (Glaw and Vences, 2006; Glaw et al., 2006), Gephyromantis is a monophyletic group and part of the Malagasy–Comoroan endemic family Mantellidae. Its species are classified into five subgenera: Duboimantis, comprising medium-sized frogs with nocturnal calling behavior often from rather high perches; Phylacomantis with medium-sized species of mostly nocturnal calling behavior; Laurentomantis with small-sized, secretive nocturnal species with often very tubercular dorsal integument; Vatomantis, with smallsized species living between mossy boulders in small streams, with
   
556 N. Kaffenberger et al. / Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 62 (2012) 555–560
nocturnal or diurnal behavior; and the subgenus Gephyromantis with small-sized species of diurnal calling behavior. All species in the genus Gephyromantis are restricted to rainforest habitat except those of the subgenus Phylacomantis which also (Gephyromantis pseudoasper) or exclusively (other Phylacomantis species) occur in forests of Madagascar’s drier western regions.
Previous molecular analyses of Gephyromantis have either included a limited number of species (e.g., Glaw and Vences, 2006) or were based on single mitochondrial genes only (Vences and Glaw, 2001; Vieites et al., 2009). Here we provide an analysis on the basis of five mitochondrial and five nuclear genes from all nominal species plus a number of confirmed and unconfirmed candidate species of this genus. We use the resulting phylogeny to discuss biogeographic centers of diversification, evolution of reproductive modes, and subgeneric classification within the genus.
2. Materials and methods
Tissue samples preserved in absolute ethanol were available from 51 Gephyromantis species and candidate species. Terminology and numbering of candidate species follows Vieites et al. (2009) in most cases. Sequences of representatives of two other mantellid genera, Mantidactylus sp. aff. ulcerosus and Boophis doulioti, were used as hierarchical outgroups; sequences of these species were for some genes complemented by sequences of other congeneric taxa. With exception of a few taxa we used a single sample per species for all genes. In cases where we combined sequences from different individuals, these were almost always from the same locality or otherwise from specimens that had been reliably identified. Supplementary Table 1 lists these cases in detail and provides information on all voucher specimens, collecting localities, and GenBank accession numbers. In the Nexus analysis file available from the Dryad data repository (doi: 10.5061/ dryad.s791pg03) the voucher for each sequence is specified.
For all samples five gene fragments of the mitochondrial genome were sequenced: 668 bp of the 12SrRNA and tRNAVal genes, 633 bp and 557 bp (two fragments) of the 16SrRNA gene, up to 959 bp of the cytochrome b gene (Cyt b) and 628 bp of the cytochrome oxidase subunit I gene (Cox1). Furthermore, fragments of five nuclear genes were included: 292 bp of the histone 3 gene (H3), 633 bp of exon 1 of the tyrosinase gene (Tyr), 672 bp of the brain derived neurotrophic factor gene (BDNF), and 758 bp and 443 bp, respectively, of the recombination-activating genes Rag-1 and Rag-2. For primer sequences see Supplementary materials.
Total genomic DNA was extracted using proteinase K (10 mg/ ml) digestion followed by a standard salt-extraction protocol (Bruford et al., 1992). Standard polymerase chain reactions were performed in a final volume of 10 ll and using 0.3 ll each of 10 lM primer, 0.25 ll of total dNTP 10 mM, 0.08 ll of 5 u/ll GoTaq and 2.5 ll 5x GoTaq Reaction Buffer. PCR conditions are given in Supplementary materials.
The successfully amplified products were purified using Exonuclease I and Shrimp Alkaline Phosphatase (SAP) or Antarctic Phosphatase (AP) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (NEB). Purified PCR templates were sequenced on both strands using dye-labeled didesoxy terminator cycle sequencing on an ABI 3130 automated DNA sequencer.
Chromatograms were checked and sequences were corrected by hand, where necessary, using CodonCode Aligner (v. 3.5.6, Codon Code Cooperation). In the protein-coding sequences no stop codons were found. Therefore, we concluded that we sequenced real mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and not nuclear copies of mtDNA. Where the same individual specimens had been used in previous studies (Glaw and Vences, 2006; Vieites et al., 2009; Wollenberg et al.,
2011), the dataset was complemented by sequences available from GenBank. All newly determined sequences were submitted to GenBank (accession numbers JN664263-JN664580 and JN680744JN680764; for a detailed list of GenBank and voucher numbers, see Supplementary materials). The final alignment with all settings for the partitioned Bayesian analysis (see below) was submitted to the Dryad data repository (available under doi:10.5061/ dryad.s791pg03).
We conducted maximum likelihood (ML), maximum parsimony (MP) and partitioned and unpartitioned Bayesian inference (BI) searches based on the full concatenated dataset, as well as ML and unpartitioned Bayesian analyses on single-gene datasets. For all partitions we excluded positions at the beginning or end with missing data in many taxa, and in 12S and 16S we furthermore excluded a number of hypervariable regions that could not be reliably aligned. Models of sequence evolution used for ML and Bayesian analysis were determined by Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) in MrModeltest (Nylander, 2004). For each gene the individual codon positions were examined for the appropriate model of sequence evolution. For information about selected models see Supplementary materials. Bootstrap analyses under the ML optimality criterion with 1000 replicates were carried out in RAxML (Stamatakis et al., 2005) on the CIPRES server (Miller et al., 2009), using the rapid hill-climbing mode, with all free model parameters estimated assuming a GTR model with a gamma model of rate heteorgeneity. Bootstrap analyses under the MP optimality criterion were carried out in PAUP􏰈 version 4 beta 10 (Swofford, 2002) with equal character weighting, tree bisection and reconnection (TBR) branch swapping, 2000 replicates, and random addition sequence with 10 replicates.
For BI analysis of the concatenated dataset we compared various partition schemes: (1) maximum partitions, consisting of 24 partitions: 12S, 16S-30, 16S-50 and each codon position of the protein-coding genes; (2) semi-maximum partitions, consisting of eight partitions roughly corresponding to each one of the genes: BDNF, Cox1, Cyt b, H3, Rag-1, Rag-2, Tyr and 12S + 16S; (3) mitochondrial vs. nuclear DNA, consisting of two partitions; (4) unpartitioned. For each partition scheme, BI analysis was run in MrBayes 3.1.2 (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck, 2003) using default conditions, including default priors and heating (one cold and three heated chains); posterior probabilities were obtained from the 50% majority rule consensus tree. Analyses were run for 10 million generations, every 1000th tree was sampled and the first 50% of trees were discarded as a conservative burn-in after assessing that chains had converged and log-likelihood values had stabilized using AWTY (Nylander et al., 2008).
We used a Bayes factor analysis to determine the most appropriate partition scheme for BI (see Supplementary materials), which suggested the maximum partition scheme as the best for the combined data set. Hence, we considered the maximum partition as most appropriate to our data and performed again two parallel runs with four chains each, for 50 million generations, sampling every 1000th tree. In both runs, swapping rate between successive chains was 7–17%, the average standard deviation of split frequencies was <0.005, and analysis in AWTY suggested convergence among the two runs. The trees of the first 10% of generations were excluded as burn-in (burnin = 5000 trees), based on examination of the log-likelihood values using Tracer, version 1.5 (Rambaut and Drummond, 2009). The consensus trees obtained from the two parallel runs did not show any differences regarding the well-supported nodes.
General geographic regions follow the definitions of Boumans et al. (2007). Locality information was obtained from an extensive database (adjusted from Glaw and Vences, 2007) to construct GISreferenced distribution maps of all species with ArcView GIS (ver. 3.2a, 1992–2000; ESRI, Redlands, CA). All maps are published in

Glaw and Vences (2007) with only small updates on the basis of new publications. Minimum Convex Polygons (MCP) were assumed to represent conservative measures for actual species distributions as implied by the presence locality data. We performed the Bayesian method of biogeographic and ancestral state reconstruction implemented in RASP (Reconstruct Ancestral State in Phylogenies, Yu et al., 2011; Olsson et al., 2006; Sanmartín et al., 2008). For this, species distribution areas were assigned to geographical
regions as defined by Boumans et al. (2007) based on centers of endemism and retreat-dispersion watersheds of Wilmé et al. (2006). We here distinguish between three simplified regions A – North, B – South, and C – West. A is comprised of several geographical regions derived from the watershed hypothesis (Wilmé et al., 2006), namely Sambirano, North, North-East, and Northern Central East. B is comprised of the regions South, South-East, and Southern Central East. Endemic species from the
N. Kaffenberger et al. / Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 62 (2012) 555–560 557
  Fig. 1. Consensus phylogram of 51 species and candidate species in the genus Gephyromantis, obtained by partitioned Bayesian analysis of 5843 bp of concatenated DNA sequences of five mitochondrial and five nuclear genes. The tree was rooted using Boophis doulioti and Mantidactylus ulcerosus as outgroups (not shown; for some genes, other species of these genera were used, see Section 2). Asterisks represent Bayesian posterior probabilities (􏰈0.95–0.98; 􏰈􏰈0.99–1.00), and numbers represent bootstrap values in percent from an ML and MP analyses (above and below nodes, respectively; not shown if below 70%). Taxa are colored on the basis of their current assignment to subgenera. Type species of subgenera are underlined. Inset photos show representatives of subclades. Size is roughly representative of body size of the respective taxa, but not to scale. Species for which the reproductive mode has been reliably ascertained are marked with square and circle symbols: black aquare = endotrophic in terrestrial nest; gray square = endotrophic, tadpoles found in streams; black circle = exotrophic, carnivorous tadpoles; gray circle = exotrophic, generalized tadpoles. Capital letters (A–G) denote major clades as discussed in the text. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

558 N. Kaffenberger et al. / Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 62 (2012) 555–560
West geographic region are coded as ‘‘C’’. The rationale for simplifying these regions as North, South and West, is the occurrence of large distribution gaps between the ranges of most Gephyromantis species restricted to either of them. Widespread species between A and B were coded AB. The Bayesian binary analysis was run with the fixed state frequencies model (JC, Jukes-Cantor). Among-site variation (Gamma) was set to equal, and no outgroup was defined (root distribution was set to NULL). We run the analysis for five million generations with 10 chains and two parallel runs of which a combined result was obtained.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Phylogeny and classification of Gephyromantis
The total alignment of concatenated DNA sequences comprised 5843 bp, after exclusion of hypervariable sites, stretches of incomplete sequences at the beginning and end of each gene sub-alignment, and roughly the first half of the cytochrome b subalignment (that was only available for a small number of taxa). Of these, 3782 were constant and 1489 of the variable characters were parsimony informative. All species and candidate species differed from each other by deep divergences in all mitochondrial genes. Except for the very short and conserved sequences of H3 and BDNF, haplotype sharing among species was uncommon in the nuclear genes and most species differed by at least one or two mutational differences from the sequences of the most similar species. Four instances of haplotype sharing were observed in H3 (concerning 6, 4 and 2 species of clade A, respectively, and 2 of clade D), five instances in BDNF (concerning 5 and 3 species in clade A, 9 and 2 species in clade D, and 2 species in clade C), two instances in Rag-1 (2 species each of clades A and D), and two instances in Rag-2 (2 species each of clades A and F). No haplotype sharing was found in Tyr. Despite the low sample size of only one individual per species, this congruent differentiation in mitochondrial and nuclear DNA is in agreement with the status of most, if not all Gephyromantis species and candidate species as independent evolutionary lineages.
Based on the BI and ML analysis of the concatenated dataset (Fig. 1), we identified five highly supported major clades within Gephyromantis, here denoted as clades A–E. Of these, clade A contains all species of the subgenus Gephyromantis as formerly defined except Gephyromantis klemmeri; clade B contains all species of the subgenus Phylacomantis; clades C and D together contain all species of the subgenus Duboimantis; and clade E contains G. klemmeri, and species of the subgenera Laurentomantis and Vatomantis. The relationships among these five major clades could not be resolved with any relevant support. Within clade E, the two subgenera Laurentomantis and Vatomantis form strongly supported monophyletic groups (clades F and G), and G. klemmeri is sister to Laurentomantis.
In the Bayesian single gene analyses (see Table 1 and trees in Supplementary materials), not considering H3 sequences which were very short and rather uninformative, clades A–D were supported by all genes (except clade D by 12S and BDNF), and often received strong support. Clades F and G were recovered by most or all mitochondrial genes, although often with low support, while the nuclear gene analyses often did not recover these clades. In contrast with the mtDNA genes, the nuclear genes often recovered clades F and G as nested within clade E. All or most species included in clades C and D were placed in a monophyletic group, corresponding to the subgenus Duboimantis, by one of the single-gene analyses. Also in those analyses where particular clades were not recovered, there very rarely was strong support for an alternative topology.
In some of the five major clades, several subgroups could be reliably resolved in the concatenated analysis (Fig. 1). In clade D,
a subclade with species characterized by distinct inner and outer dorsolateral ridges (Vences and Glaw, 2001) and paired subgular vocal sacs (Gephyromantis luteus, Gephyromantis plicifer, Gephyromantis sculpturatus) is sister to a clade containing species without prominent dorsolateral ridges, and partly with single subgular vocal sacs. In clade A, several subclades include (1) Gephyromantis decaryi, Gephyromantis leucocephalus, and several candidate species that are bioacoustically and morphologically similar, (2) Gephyromantis eiselti, Gephyromantis thelenae, and one candidate species similar to G. thelenae, (3) a single candidate species from Andohahela, (4) Gephyromantis boulengeri and several candidate species, and (5) Gephyromantis blanci, Gephyromantis enki, Gephyromantis runewsweeki, and one candidate species similar to G. blanci.
In general terms, the molecular data corroborate the current classification of Gephyromantis into subgenera (Glaw and Vences, 2006) but point to two issues that will require more intensive taxonomic work in the future. First, the monophyly of Duboimantis as currently defined was not supported by the concatenated Bayesian analysis (Fig. 1), and it is probably warranted to include Gephyromantis ambohitra, Gephyromantis asper, Gephyromantis tahotra, Gephyromantis spinifer, and one candidate species in a new subgenus, corresponding to clade C (Fig. 1). Reproductive modes support this subdivision, with generalized tadpoles in clade C and non-feeding tadpoles in clade D (Fig. 1). However, as results are conflicting, with one of the single-gene analyses (Table 1) and the ML analysis of the concatenated data supporting the monophyly of Duboimantis in its current definition, we here refrain from errecting a new subgenus until more data accumulate. Second, it is clear that G. klemmeri needs to be excluded from the subgenus Gephyromantis, but because its position as sister group of Laurentomantis is not supported by all single gene analyses, we refrain from simply including it in Laurentomantis. Additional data are needed to understand whether the situation is best reflected by (a) including G. klemmeri in Laurentomantis, (b) erecting a new monotypic subgenus, or (c) redefining a more inclusive subgenus Laurentomantis that besides G. klemmeri would also include Vatomantis as a junior synonym.
3.2. Evolution of reproductive modes
Although data on larval development are available for only a few Gephyromantis species (Blommers-Schlösser, 1979; Glaw and
Table 1
Summary of results of single-gene BI and ML analyses. Abbreviations: A–G refer to major clades as shown in Fig. 1. Gk refers to G. klemmeri. + indicates the respective clade (including all or most taxa included in it in Fig. 1) was recovered, but with low support (posterior probabilities <95% or bootstrap values <70%); ++ indicates posterior probabilities of 95–98% or bootstrap values of 70–90%; +++ indicates posterior probabilities of 99–100% or bootstrap values of 91–100%; (+) indicates a clade with most but not all of the respective taxa was recovered; indicates respective clade not recovered, but alternative topology not supported; 􏰀􏰀 indicates clade not recovered and some aspect of alternative topology received relevant support; NN indicates not applicable. Mantidactylus ulcerosus was used as outgroup in all analyses. All single-gene consensus trees from the BI analyses are included in Supplementary materials.
 Gene A B C D C+D
12S ++ +++ +++ 16S-30 +++ + +++ + 16S-50 +++ ++ +++ + Cytb + + ++ (+) Cox1 +++ +++ ++ (+) H3 + Tyr +++ +++ +++ + 􏰀􏰀 BDNF +++ +++ +++ 􏰀􏰀 +++ Rag-1 ++ +++ +++ (+) Rag-2 +++ + ++ +++ -
E F F+Gk G
+++ NN +++ + ++ + +++ +
+++ + (+) (+) + +++ (+) +++ (+) (+) + +++ NN ++ -
  
Vences, 1994; Vences and Glaw, 2001; Randrianiaina et al., 2007, 2011; Reeve et al., 2011), these developmental data fit perfectly with the major clades in our phylogeny (Fig. 1), with generalized exotrophic tadpoles in clade C, carnivorous exotrophic tadpoles in clade B, endotrophic larvae (Thibaud and Altig, 1999) developing in terrestrial nests in clade A, and endotrophic larvae at least sometimes developing in streams in clades D and E. Due to the lack of support for the basal relationships in our tree it is currently impossible to ascertain whether endotrophy evolved only once in Gephyromantis (with clades A, D and E forming a monophyletic group) or whether it originated convergently among these clades, or even reversed in clades B or C, as hypothesized by Vences and Glaw (2001).
Monophyly of the subgenus Duboimantis (clades C and D), is supported by some molecular data (see above), and by the presence of distinct inner and outer dorsolateral ridges and of humeral
glands in most species of clade C and in the most basal species of clade D, G. luteus, G. plicifer, and G. sculpturatus (Vences and Glaw, 2001). These morphological characters are, as far as is known, unique among species of mantellids, which supports their origin in an ancestor of Duboimantis (clades C + D) and subsequent reduction in the clade sister to the G. luteus/plicifer/sculpturatus clade. This scenario and thus the monophyly of Duboimantis would require assuming some kind of homoplasy of larval development: either a reversal to exotrophy in clade C, or convergent endotrophy in clade D and clades A and/or E.
3.3. Regional diversification and lineage origins in northern Madagascar
The phylogeny presented in Fig. 1 suggests a number of biogeographic inferences. Almost all Gephyromantis are confined to
N. Kaffenberger et al. / Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 62 (2012) 555–560 559
  Fig. 2. (a) Bayesian reconstruction of ancestral distribution areas. Tree topology and clade names A–G from Fig. 1. Areas of endemism are coded by colored dots at nodes with blue (North), red (South), and yellow (West) as shown in inset map (b). Only most likely states at nodes are shown. Purple dots refer to broad North-South distributions. Black circles around dots at nodes indicate events of dispersal. Inset map (b) shows areas of endemism and retreat-dispersion watersheds according to Wilmé et al. (2006), colored according to the definition of North, South and West as used in the Bayesian reconstruction. White dots indicate distribution area centroids for all studied species of Gephyromantis. The inset map below (c) indicates main geographic regions as defined by Boumans et al. (2007) and used herein. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

560 N. Kaffenberger et al. / Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 62 (2012) 555–560
rainforest habitat (all except Gephyromantis pseudoasper, G. azzurrae, G. corvus, and G. atsingy), and rainforest in Madagascar can be described as a relatively narrow band along the east coast extending approximately from north to south (Vences et al., 2009), facilitating biogeographic interpretation. In the ancestral area analyses, the difference between the Bayesian runs 1 and 2 was 0.0004, which is considered to indicate a sufficient number of generations (Yu et al., 2011). All inferred node frequencies were 1.0 (not shown). Fig. 2 shows the most likely states at nodes only; a tree containing likelihood values of all states at nodes can be found in Supplementary Fig. 11. The analysis reconstructs the origin of the genus Gephyromantis in the northern half of Madagascar, and most or all species of several major clades occur in this area: clade E with the subgenera Laurentomantis and Vatomantis, and clade D containing most species of Duboimantis. Clade A (subgenus Gephyromantis) mainly contains species distributed in southern Madagascar, and the initial diversification of this group is reconstructed ambiguously as northern, southern or widespread, with a slightly higher likelihood value indicating an origin in the north and subsequent diversification in the south (Supplementary materials Fig. 11).
The reconstructed northern origin and occurrence in the northern geographic regions of Madagascar is most clear in clades D and E, considering that clade D contains some species that are widespread with ranges extending also into the north-east, such as G. luteus and G. redimitus. Many of the species in these clades are endemic not only to the northern half of Madagascar as defined here, but to small ranges within the Sambirano, North, and North-East regions (Fig. 2c; concerns one species of clade B, two species of clade C, seven species of clade E, and six species of clade D; see distribution maps in Glaw and Vences, 2007). This pattern is similar to that of other organisms in Madagascar, for instance cophyline frogs (Andreone et al., 2005; Wollenberg et al., 2008) and Brookesia leaf chameleons (Townsend et al., 2009), and confirms that studying these regions is important for the understanding of species diversification mechanisms in Madagascar (Vences et al., 2009).
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to numerous colleagues for their help during the collection of some of the samples: Franco Andreone, Parfait Bora, Rainer Dolch, Hildegard Enting, Olga Jovanovic, Roger-Daniel Randrianiaina, Goran Safarek, and Augustin Sarovy. Gabi Keunecke, Meike Kondermann and Eva Saxinger were of invaluable help in the lab. Angelica Crottini and Paul Hebert provided unpublished primer sequences. We are deeply indebted to two anonymous reviewers, whose comments and suggestions significantly improved the manuscript. This study was carried out in the framework of a cooperation accord between the Département de Biologie Animale of the University of Antananarivo, Madagascar, the Technical University of Braunschweig, and the Zoologische Staatssammlung, München, Germany. Financial support was granted by the Volkswagen Foundation to MV and FG, by the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst to KCW, and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grant VE247/2-1) to MV.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2011.09.023.
References
