  The University of Chicago
Use of an Exotic Host Plant Affects Mate Choice in an Insect Herbivore. Author(s): Matthew L. Forister and Cynthia F. Scholl
Reviewed work(s):
Source: The American Naturalist, Vol. 179, No. 6 (June 2012), pp. 805-810 Published by: The University of Chicago Press for The American Society of Naturalists Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/665647 .
Accessed: 19/06/2012 13:22
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
         http://www.jstor.org
The University of Chicago Press, The American Society of Naturalists, The University of Chicago are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Naturalist.

 vol. 179, no. 6 the american naturalist june 2012
 Natural History Note
Use of an Exotic Host Plant Affects Mate Choice in an Insect Herbivore
Matthew L. Forister* and Cynthia F. Scholl
Program in Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation Biology, Department of Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada 89557
Submitted October 15, 2011; Accepted January 23, 2012; Electronically published April 19, 2012 Dryad data: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.d56g84n5.
 abstract: The colonization of exotic plants by herbivorous insects has provided opportunities for investigating causes and consequences of the evolution of niche breadth. The butterfly Lycaeides melissa utilizes exotic alfalfa, Medicago sativa, which is a relatively poor larval resource, and previous studies have found that caterpillars that consume M. sativa develop into smaller and less fecund adults. Here we investigate the effect of smaller female body size on male mate preference, a previously unexplored consequence of novel host use. Smaller females, which developed on the exotic host, were less likely to be visited by males. This result was confirmed with a second set of choice tests involving females reared on a single plant species, thus ruling out host-specific confounding factors. We suggest that an effect on mate choice be considered part of the complex suite of factors determining persistence of herbivorous insects following colonization of new habitats or resources.
Keywords: hierarchical Bayesian model, introduced plant, Lycaenidae, Lycaeides melissa, Medicago sativa.
  intraspecific interactions resulting from the use of novel resources or environments. Here we investigate a simple but previously unexplored intraspecific consequence of novel resource use in an herbivorous insect involving mate choice and size variation resulting from development on different host plant species.
Our focal species, Lycaeides melissa, the Melissa blue butterfly, is part of a complex of lycaenid butterflies that have been the subject of numerous studies in ecology and evolutionary biology (Fordyce and Nice 2003; Nice et al. 2005; Lucas et al. 2008; Gompert et al. 2010; Forister et al. 2011; Vila et al. 2011). Within the Lycaeides complex, L. melissa has been used to study the ecology of diet breadth, as L. melissa populations can be found throughout western North America utilizing both native host plants and alfalfa, Medicago sativa, an exotic novel host (Nice and Shapiro 1999). The exotic host is a relatively poor larval resource; individuals reared on M. sativa develop into adult butterflies that can be as much as 70% smaller than individuals reared on a common native host, Astragalus canadensis (Forister et al. 2009). The reduction in adult size associated with M. sativa consumption has consequences for fitness and population persistence (Forister et al. 2011).
Beyond direct effects on fitness, variation in adult size is known to affect mating behavior in many animals. In particular, female choice frequently involves a preference for larger males or exaggerated traits (e.g., Ryan 1980; Hunt et al. 2009). Male choice has been less commonly examined (Bonduriansky 2001), though males prefer larger and more fecund females in Drosophila melanogaster (Byrne and Rice 2006); sand lizards, Lacerta agilis (Olsson 1993); and sailfin mollies, Poecilia latipinna (Gumm and Gabor 2005). In Lycaeides, females perch on host plants and are approached by patrolling males, which makes the system tractable for investigations of male choice. A previous study of male mate choice in Lycaeides (Fordyce et al. 2002) investigated the importance of ventral wing pat-
Introduction
Herbivorous insects and their host plants have often been used as models for investigating the evolution of ecological niches (Jermy 1984; Futuyma and Moreno 1988). In particular, plant-insect systems have been useful in studies of tritrophic factors affecting diet breadth (Singer and Stireman 2005) and in studies addressing complex causes and consequences of habitat choice (Jaenike and Holt 1991). For example, plant-insect systems were influential in providing demonstrations of enemy-free space associated with the colonization of novel resources (e.g., Fox and Eisenbach 1992; Gratton and Welter 1999), an idea that has subsequently been explored in a diversity of groups (e.g., Schmidt et al. 2001; Cole et al. 2005). While escape from enemies can be an important interspecific effect of novel resources, relatively less is known about consequences for
  * Corresponding author; e-mail: mforister@unr.edu.
Am. Nat. 2012. Vol. 179, pp. 805–810. 􏱞 2012 by The University of Chicago. 0003-0147/2012/17906-53394$15.00. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1086/665647
 
 806 The American Naturalist
 terns for discrimination among conand heterospecifics. While Fordyce et al. (2002) focused on pattern variation, here we focus on variation in body size. Specifically, we used females that had been reared in the laboratory and presented them to males in two natural populations. These choice tests allowed us to address the possibility that a reduction in adult size resulting from the consumption of the exotic larval host could have an impact on the probability of finding a mate.
Methods
Experiments investigating the influence of variation in adult size on male mate choice were conducted in two phases over the course of 2 years. Years differed in the source of females used in experiments and in the location of field experiments but shared a common field protocol and analysis, involving dead females presented in choice arrays to males, as described below.
Rearing Females for Choice Arrays
In the first experiments, females were taken from an experiment that has been reported elsewhere; Forister et al. (2009) reared Lycaeides melissa caterpillars on native and novel hosts, Astragalus canadensis and Medicago sativa, respectively. For the experiments described here, laboratoryreared females were picked haphazardly from the two pools of adults reared on the two host plant species and paired for mate-choice experiments (one female from M. sativa and one from A. canadensis). Size was measured as forewing length using digital calipers to the nearest thousandth of a millimeter. The females reared on M. sativa were always smaller than the females reared on A. canadensis (Forister et al. 2009).
We were interested in the potential influence of size variation on male mate choice. In the first experiments, size variation was confounded with rearing host. The smaller females were reared on the novel host, M. sativa, and the larger females were reared on the native host, A. canadensis. Thus, any apparent effect of body size in choice arrays could be a direct result of size or some less apparent effect of larval diet. For example, ultraviolet wing patterns are affected by larval diet in another butterfly (Knu ̈ttel and Fiedler 2001). Therefore, a second set of experiments was conducted involving females reared on a single host species. For these experiments, the native plant A. canadensis was used because we knew that variation in size could be produced by rearing caterpillars in groups on this host. Twenty-five female butterflies were collected from a population at Silver Lake, just north of Reno, Nevada. These females were caged in oviposition chambers in groups of five with sprigs of A. canadensis; eggs were removed after
 48 h and pooled into a single collection. As larvae hatched, they were split into groups of 8–10 and reared to adults in large petri dishes (170-mm diameter), with fresh plant material added as needed (approximately every 2–3 days). As adults emerged, they were killed and kept dry at room temperature until the start of choice experiments. Females were again selected haphazardly for use in preference arrays and paired (large and small) using the arbitrary minimum difference of 0.15 cm between the forewing lengths of the large and small females in an experimental pair.
Experimental Choice Arrays
The mating behavior of Lycaeides typically begins with a female perched on a host plant in a head-down, wingsclosed position (Pellmyr 1982). To mimic this position in choice arrays, dead females were glued head-down 1 cm from the tip of thin wooden skewers (30 cm in length) and placed in pairs among natural vegetation (with the ends of skewers in the ground). The two females in a pair were placed 30 cm apart, which was sufficiently close that they could easily be monitored but sufficiently distant that it was clear when a male had chosen to approach one of the females. The number of male approaches to each female in a pair was recorded over a period of 15 min (observers stood at approximately 3 m, which is beyond the range at which any disturbance to butterfly behavior would occur). A male approach was scored if the flight path was altered and the male fluttered near the female (within a radius of approximately 5 cm) for several seconds.
In the first year of experiments, specimens were derived from Beckwourth Pass (where both native and exotic hosts are used by L. melissa), and experiments were performed at the same location. In the second year, specimens were the progeny of females collected at Silver Lake, but field experiments were conducted at a third location, Verdi, which is an alfalfa-associated population west of Reno, Nevada. Verdi was chosen for the experiments in the second year because the density of males was sufficiently high at the time specimens were ready for experiments.
Preference Analyses
Our primary data from choice experiments consisted of counts of male approaches to pairs of females. While these data could be analyzed with a nonparametric approach (e.g., a paired Wilcoxon test) commonly used with preference arrays, we utilized a hierarchical Bayesian model designed for ecological count data (Fordyce et al. 2011) as implemented in the R package bayespref. The hierarchical model is advantageous in preference applications because it can be used to directly estimate the strength of
 
 Mate Choice and Exotic Host Use 807
 preference and 95% credible intervals around those estimates, rather than simply rejecting a null hypothesis of no preference (as with a Wilcoxon test). This is accomplished by modeling both preferences associated with individual pairs of females (as binomial distributions), given the observed count data, and also population-level preferences (as beta distributions), given preferences estimated at the individual-array level (Fordyce et al. 2011). Models in bayespref were run for 10,000 generations, with 3,000generation burn-ins, and diagnostic plots were examined to verify mixing of search chains.
Morphometrics
Morphological measurements on hind wings were conducted to explore variation associated with the categorical assignments of “small” and “large” females used in preference arrays. Previous experiments have shown that subtle variation in hind wing spot patterns can have important consequences for male mate choice in Lycaeides (Fordyce et al. 2002). Thus, it was of interest for the present experiments to know whether larger and smaller females differed simply in overall size or whether they differed in relative sizes of certain pattern elements or wing dimensions. Measurements were taken from 41 lab-reared females: 21 reared on the novel host and 20 reared on the native host (derived from the experiments in Forister et al. 2009). Nine measurements were taken from the ventral surface of the hind wing as follows; more measurement details and a map of wing landmarks can be found in Fordyce et al. (2002). Three linear measurements were (1) terminus of 2A vein to terminus of Sc vein, (2) spot c to vein M1 terminus, and (3) spot c to vein Cu2 terminus. Five area measurements were (4) area of spot Sc, (5) area of spot c, (6) area of spot M1, (7) area of spot Cu2􏱘1a, (8) area of aurorae a2, and (9) area of aurorae a6. A principal components analysis was performed on the morphological data using the “prcomp” command in R. This was done both with raw values and with values standardized by the area and perimeter of the hind wing.
Results
Males expressed a preference for larger females (fig. 1A). In experiments performed the first year, the average (􏱠SE) number of visits for larger females was 2.78 􏱠 0.53, while the average number of visits for the smaller females was 0.72 􏱠 0.16 visits. In the second year, larger females received an average of 3.75 􏱠 0.84 visits, and smaller females were visited an average of 1.5 􏱠 0.33 times. The courtship behaviors exhibited by males were clear and often prolonged. In some cases, males perched on the skewers and attempted to mate with the (dead) experimental females,
   A
________________________ __________
|
0.0
First year | | Second year | Choice arrays
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Preference
-4 -2 0 2 4
PC 1
  B
              C
                                                   Figure 1: Results from experimental preference arrays and an illustration of morphometric variation. A, Each stacked bar corresponds to a single array (a pair of females), with green bars illustrating the number of visits to small females and purple bars the number of visits to large females. B, Solid lines are posterior probability densities describing population-level preferences from the hierarchical model of the first year’s preference data. Green lines are preferences for small females, purple lines are for large females, and vertical dashed lines mark 95% credible intervals. C, Variation in ventral hind wing patterns, with green circles representing individuals reared on the novel host, Medicago sativa, and purple triangles representing individuals reared on the native host, Astragalus canadensis.
while never visiting the smaller females. In 8 out of 26 trials across both years, the smaller females received no visits at all.
Figure 1B illustrates posterior probabilities of preference for the first year involving individuals reared on the two host species. The estimate of population-level preference for larger females in two-way arrays is 78%, with a 95% credible interval from 66% to 86%. For smaller females, the population preference is 22% (15%–34% credible interval). The results from analysis of the second year’s data with the same hierarchical model are qualitatively identical
 PC 2 Probability density Number of visits
-2 -1 0 1 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10

 808 The American Naturalist
 to those pictured in figure 1B: 68% population-level preference for larger females (49%–84% credible interval) and 32% for smaller females (17%–51% credible interval). In all eight of the pairs tested the second year, larger females received more visits (fig. 1A). These results are consistent with the idea that variation in size (rather than some unmeasured effect of larval host) affects mate choice, because the experiments in the first year used individuals reared on two hosts while the experiments in the second year (which reached a similar conclusion) used individuals reared on a single host.
Across both years, specimens of the larger females ranged in size from 1.2 to 1.95 cm (forewing length), with a mean of 1.56 cm, while smaller females ranged from 0.8 to 1.52 cm, with a mean of 1.22. The average difference between pairs of females in choice arrays was 0.33􏱠 0.032 cm. Males were not more likely to visit the larger females as the size difference increased between pairs of females; the correlation between the fraction of visits received by the larger female and the difference in size was not significant (Spearman rank correlation p 0.024, P p .91).
A simple effect of size variation is supported by the morphometric analysis of individuals reared on the two hosts, as illustrated in figure 1C. The specimens separate primarily along a single axis (principal component [PC] 1; all traits loaded positively, ranging from 0.30 to 0.35) that explains 87% of the variation. These results indicate that butterflies reared on different hosts vary in overall size and that pattern elements scale positively with body size. If measurements are standardized by wing area and perimeter, the resulting plot of PC2 versus PC1 produces a single cloud of points (not shown) and the first axis explains only 25% of the variation.
Discussion
The spread of exotic plants into native communities has of course had numerous unwanted consequences but at least one positive outcome: a chance to study the repeated colonization of novel resources (Carroll and Boyd 2003; Feder et al. 2003; Graves and Shapiro 2003; Singer et al. 2008; Jahner et al. 2011). Here we report on a previously unstudied consequence resulting from an herbivorous insect switching to an exotic host plant. Female Lycaeides butterflies are smaller when they develop on the novel host relative to when they develop on their native host and as a consequence appear to be less preferred by males searching for mates. Males often completely ignored smaller females in two-way choice arrays. The benefits of mating with a larger, more fecund female are presumably sufficiently great to warrant such choosiness, as has been sug-
 gested in experiments with Drosophila (Byrne and Rice 2006) and other species (Bonduriansky 2001).
From the female perspective, these results could reflect a real cost to having developed on a relatively poor larval resource. Although life span has not been quantified in the wild, these are short-lived butterflies even under benign laboratory conditions, where females live up to approximately 2 weeks with ample nectar (M. Forister, personal observation). If longevity is reduced in the field for whatever reason and inclement weather intervenes, a given female might have a few days in which to secure a mate and successfully lay eggs (Doak et al. 2006). If she is consistently passed up by males in favor of larger females, the result could be zero realized fecundity. This possibility is consistent with the observation that wild-caught females caged in oviposition chambers will occasionally lay infertile eggs (M. Forister, personal observation). Of course, a reduction in fecundity associated with the mechanism proposed here will be most relevant to situations where highand low-quality resources grow in proximity. Indeed, Lycaeides melissa frequently colonize alfalfa that has invaded natural communities (as opposed to large cultivated monocultures), thus increasing the possibility that hosts of differing quality (native and exotic, in this case) cooccur.
In a previous study of mate choice in Lycaeides, Fordyce et al. (2002) used both dead specimens (as in this study) and paper models and found that male courtship behaviors elicited by the two types of models were comparable. Subtle variation in pattern elements in the paper models (which did not contain pheromones or other cues) had predictable effects. Fordyce et al. (2002) inferred that the initiation of courtship has a large visual component, which likely acts before chemical communication occurring later and at closer range. The work that we report builds on this previous study in that we assume that the predominant mechanism acting in our study is visual, as we have no reason to expect that different conclusions would have been reached with paper models. In addition, preferences were not affected by rearing host, which potentially rules out confounding factors such as variation in pheromones or other cues associated with larval diet. Finally, it should be noted that we used choice experiments and different results could have been obtained in a no-choice setting. It is not known whether males judge absolute size or the contrast between females. However, like many insects, L. melissa frequently occur in high densities, where patrolling males could evaluate or compare two or more females as in our experiments.
Conclusion
The utilization of the exotic host by L. melissa is affected by a web of contingencies that includes the reproductive
 
 810 The American Naturalist
 The Melissa blue butterfly (Lycaeides melissa) visiting a flower (illustration by Matthew Forister).
  